Having settled this very general rule, let us descend to more detailed
consideration of method. The Ethnographer has in the field, according
to what has just been said, the duty before him of drawing up all
the rules and regularities of tribal life; all that is permanent
and fixed; of giving an anatomy of their culture, of depicting the
constitution of their society. But these things, though crystallised
and set, are nowhere formulated. There is no written or explicitly
expressed code of laws, and their whole tribal tradition, the whole
structure of their society, are embodied in the most elusive of all
materials; the human being. But not even in human mind or memory are
these laws to be found definitely formulated. The natives obey the
forces and commands of the tribal code, but they do not comprehend
them; exactly as they obey their instincts and their impulses, but
could not lay down a single law of psychology. The regularities in
native institutions are an automatic result of the interaction of
the mental forces of tradition, and of the material conditions of
environment. Exactly as a humble member of any modern institution,
whether it be the state, or the church, or the army, is of it and
in it, but has no vision of the resulting integral action of the
whole, still less could furnish any account of its organisation,
so it would be futile to attempt questioning a native in abstract,
sociological terms. The difference is that, in our society, every
institution has its intelligent members, its historians, and its
archives and documents, whereas in a native society there are none
of these. After this is realised an expedient has to be found to
overcome this difficulty. This expedient for an Ethnographer consists
in collecting concrete data of evidence, and drawing the general
inferences for himself. This seems obvious on the face of it, but was
not found out or at least practised in Ethnography till field work was
taken up by men of science. Moreover, in giving it practical effect,
it is neither easy to devise the concrete applications of this method,
nor to carry them out systematically and consistently.

Though we cannot ask a native about abstract, general rules, we can
always enquire how a given case would be treated. Thus for instance,
in asking how they would treat crime, or punish it, it would be vain
to put to a native a sweeping question such as, "How do you treat
and punish a criminal?" for even words could not be found to express
it in native, or in pidgin. But an imaginary case, or still better,
a real occurrence, will stimulate a native to express his opinion and
to supply plentiful information. A real case indeed will start the
natives on a wave of discussion, evoke expressions of indignation,
show them taking sides--all of which talk will probably contain a
wealth of definite views, of moral censures, as well as reveal the
social mechanism set in motion by the crime committed. From there,
it will be easy to lead them on to speak of other similar cases,
to remember other actual occurrences or to discuss them in all their
implications and aspects. From this material, which ought to cover
the widest possible range of facts, the inference is obtained by
simple induction. The scientific treatment differs from that of good
common sense, first in that a student will extend the completeness and
minuteness of survey much further and in a pedantically systematic and
methodical manner; and secondly, in that the scientifically trained
mind, will push the inquiry along really relevant lines, and towards
aims possessing real importance. Indeed, the object of scientific
training is to provide the empirical investigator with a mental chart,
in accordance with which he can take his bearings and lay his course.

To return to our example, a number of definite cases discussed will
reveal to the Ethnographer the social machinery for punishment. This
is one part, one aspect of tribal authority. Imagine further that
by a similar method of inference from definite data, he arrives at
understanding leadership in war, in economic enterprise, in tribal
festivities--there he has at once all the data necessary to answer
the questions about tribal government and social authority. In actual
field work, the comparison of such data, the attempt to piece them
together, will often reveal rifts and gaps in the information which
lead on to further investigations.

From my own experience, I can say that, very often, a problem seemed
settled, everything fixed and clear, till I began to write down a
short preliminary sketch of my results. And only then, did I see the
enormous deficiencies, which would show me where lay new problems,
and lead me on to new work. In fact, I spent a few months between my
first and second expeditions, and over a year between that and the
subsequent one, in going over all my material, and making parts of
it almost ready for publication each time, though each time I knew I
would have to re-write it. Such cross-fertilisation of constructive
work and observation, I found most valuable, and I do not think I
could have made real headway without it. I give this bit of my own
history merely to show that what has been said so far is not only an
empty programme, but the result of personal experience. In this volume,
the description is given of a big institution connected with ever so
many associated activities, and presenting many aspects. To anyone who
reflects on the subject, it will be clear that the information about
a phenomenon of such high complexity and of so many ramifications,
could not be obtained with any degree of exactitude and completeness,
without a constant interplay of constructive attempts and empirical
checking. In fact, I have written up an outline of the Kula institution
at least half a dozen times while in the field and in the intervals
between my expeditions. Each time, new problems and difficulties
presented themselves.

The collecting of concrete data over a wide range of facts is thus one
of the main points of field method. The obligation is not to enumerate
a few examples only, but to exhaust as far as possible all the cases
within reach; and, on this search for cases, the investigator will
score most whose mental chart is clearest. But, whenever the material
of the search allows it, this mental chart ought to be transformed
into a real one; it ought to materialise into a diagram, a plan,
an exhaustive, synoptic table of cases. Long since, in all tolerably
good modern books on natives, we expect to find a full list or table
of kinship terms, which includes all the data relative to it, and
does not just pick out a few strange and anomalous relationships
or expressions. In the investigation of kinship, the following up
of one relation after another in concrete cases leads naturally to
the construction of genealogical tables. Practised already by the
best early writers, such as Munzinger, and, if I remember rightly,
Kubary, this method has been developed to its fullest extent in the
works of Dr. Rivers. Again, studying the concrete data of economic
transactions, in order to trace the history of a valuable object, and
to gauge the nature of its circulation, the principle of completeness
and thoroughness would lead to construct tables of transactions,
such as we find in the work of Professor Seligman. [10] It is in
following Professor Seligman's example in this matter that I was able
to settle certain of the more difficult and detailed rules of the
Kula. The method of reducing information, if possible, into charts
or synoptic tables ought to be extended to the study of practically
all aspects of native life. All types of economic transactions may
be studied by following up connected, actual cases, and putting them
into a synoptic chart; again, a table ought to be drawn up of all the
gifts and presents customary in a given society, a table including the
sociological, ceremonial, and economic definition of every item. Also,
systems of magic, connected series of ceremonies, types of legal acts,
all could be charted, allowing each entry to be synoptically defined
under a number of headings. Besides this, of course, the genealogical
census of every community, studied more in detail, extensive maps,
plans and diagrams, illustrating ownership in garden land, hunting
and fishing privileges, etc., serve as the more fundamental documents
of ethnographic research.

A genealogy is nothing else but a synoptic chart of a number of
connected relations of kinship. Its value as an instrument of research
consists in that it allows the investigator to put questions which
he formulates to himself in abstracto, but can put concretely to
the native informant. As a document, its value consists in that it
gives a number of authenticated data, presented in their natural
grouping. A synoptic chart of magic fulfils the same function. As
an instrument of research, I have used it in order to ascertain,
for instance, the ideas about the nature of magical power. With a
chart before me, I could easily and conveniently go over one item
after the other, and note down the relevant practices and beliefs
contained in each of them. The answer to my abstract problem could
then be obtained by drawing a general inference from all the cases,
and the procedure is illustrated in Chapters XVII and XVIII. [11] I
cannot enter further into the discussion of this question, which would
need further distinctions, such as between a chart of concrete, actual
data, such as is a genealogy, and a chart summarising the outlines
of a custom or belief, as a chart of a magical system would be.

Returning once more to the question of methodological candour,
discussed previously in Division II I wish to point out here, that
the procedure of concrete and tabularised presentation of data ought
to be applied first to the Ethnographer's own credentials. That
is, an Ethnographer, who wishes to be trusted, must show clearly
and concisely, in a tabularised form, which are his own direct
observations, and which the indirect information that form the bases
of his account. The Table on the next page will serve as an example
of this procedure and help the reader of this book to form an idea
of the trustworthiness of any statement he is specially anxious to
check. With the help of this Table and the many references scattered
throughout the text, as to how, under what circumstances, and with what
degree of accuracy I arrived at a given item of knowledge, there will,
I hope remain no obscurity whatever as to the sources of the book.



       CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF KULA EVENTS WITNESSED BY THE WRITER

First Expedition, August, 1914-March, 1915.

    March, 1915. In the village of Dikoyas (Woodlark Island) a few
    ceremonial offerings seen. Preliminary information obtained.

Second Expedition, May, 1915-May, 1916.

    June, 1915. A Kabigidoya visit arrives from Vakuta to Kiriwina. Its
    anchoring at Kavataria witnessed and the men seen at Omarakana,
    where information collected.

    July, 1915. Several parties from Kitava land on the beach of
    Kaulukuba. The men examined in Omarakana. Much information
    collected in that period.

    September, 1915. Unsuccessful attempt to sail to Kitava with
    To'uluwa, the chief of Omarakana.

    October-November, 1915. Departure noticed of three expeditions
    from Kiriwina to Kitava. Each time To'uluwa brings home a haul
    of mwali (armshells).

    November, 1915-March, 1916. Preparations for a big
    overseas expedition from Kiriwina to the Marshall Bennett
    Islands. Construction of a canoe; renovating of another;
    sail making in Omarakana; launching; tasasoria on the beach of
    Kaulukuba. At the same time, information is being obtained about
    these and the associated subjects. Some magical texts of canoe
    building and Kula magic obtained.

Third Expedition, October, 1917-October, 1918.

    November, 1917-December, 1917. Inland Kula; some data obtained
    in Tukwaukwa.

    December-February, 1918. Parties from Kitava arrive in
    Wawela. Collection of information about the yoyova. Magic and
    spells of Kaygau obtained.

    March, 1918. Preparations in Sanaroa; preparations in the
    Amphletts; the Dobuan fleet arrives in the Amphletts. The uvalaku
    expedition from Dobu followed to Boyowa.

    April, 1918. Their arrival; their reception in Sinaketa; the
    Kula transactions; the big intertribal gathering. Some magical
    formulæ obtained.

    May, 1918. Party from Kitava seen in Vakuta.

    June, July, 1918. Information about Kula magic and customs
    checked and amplified in Omarakana, especially with regard to
    its Eastern branches.

    August, September, 1918. Magical texts obtained in Sinaketa.

    October, 1918. Information obtained from a number of natives in
    Dobu and Southern Massim district (examined in Samarai).



To summarise the first, cardinal point of method, I may say each
phenomenon ought to be studied through the broadest range possible of
its concrete manifestations; each studied by an exhaustive survey of
detailed examples. If possible, the results ought to be embodied into
some sort of synoptic chart, both to be used as an instrument of study,
and to be presented as an ethnological document. With the help of
such documents and such study of actualities the clear outline of the
framework of the natives' culture in the widest sense of the word, and
the constitution of their society, can be presented. This method could
be called the method of statistic documentation by concrete evidence.




VII

Needless to add, in this respect, the scientific field-work is far
above even the best amateur productions. There is, however, one point
in which the latter often excel. This is, in the presentation of
intimate touches of native life, in bringing home to us these aspects
of it with which one is made familiar only through being in close
contact with the natives, one way or the other, for a long period of
time. In certain results of scientific work--especially that which has
been called "survey work"--we are given an excellent skeleton, so to
speak, of the tribal constitution, but it lacks flesh and blood. We
learn much about the framework of their society, but within it,
we cannot perceive or imagine the realities of human life, the even
flow of everyday events, the occasional ripples of excitement over a
feast, or ceremony, or some singular occurrence. In working out the
rules and regularities of native custom, and in obtaining a precise
formula for them from the collection of data and native statements,
we find that this very precision is foreign to real life, which
never adheres rigidly to any rules. It must be supplemented by the
observation of the manner in which a given custom is carried out,
of the behaviour of the natives in obeying the rules so exactly
formulated by the ethnographer, of the very exceptions which in
sociological phenomena almost always occur.

If all the conclusions are solely based on the statements of
informants, or deduced from objective documents, it is of course
impossible to supplement them in actually observed data of real
behaviour. And that is the reason why certain works of amateur
residents of long standing, such as educated traders and planters,
medical men and officials, and last, not least, of the few intelligent
and unbiassed missionaries to whom Ethnography owes so much, this is
the reason why these works surpass in plasticity and in vividness most
of the purely scientific accounts. But if the specialised field-worker
can adopt the conditions of living described above, he is in a far
better position to be really in touch with the natives than any other
white resident. For none of them lives right in a native village,
except for very short periods, and everyone has his own business,
which takes up a considerable part of his time. Moreover, if, like a
trader or a missionary or an official he enters into active relations
with the native, if he has to transform or influence or make use of
him, this makes a real, unbiassed, impartial observation impossible,
and precludes all-round sincerity, at least in the case of the
missionaries and officials.

Living in the village with no other business but to follow native life,
one sees the customs, ceremonies and transactions over and over again,
one has examples of their beliefs as they are actually lived through,
and the full body and blood of actual native life fills out soon the
skeleton of abstract constructions. That is the reason why, working
under such conditions as previously described, the Ethnographer is
enabled to add something essential to the bare outline of tribal
constitution, and to supplement it by all the details of behaviour,
setting and small incident. He is able in each case to state whether
an act is public or private; how a public assembly behaves, and
what it looks like; he can judge whether an event is ordinary or an
exciting and singular one; whether natives bring to it a great deal
of sincere and earnest spirit, or perform it in fun; whether they do
it in a perfunctory manner, or with zeal and deliberation.

In other words, there is a series of phenomena of great importance
which cannot possibly be recorded by questioning or computing
documents, but have to be observed in their full actuality. Let us
call them the imponderabilia of actual life. Here belong such things
as the routine of a man's working day, the details of his care of
the body, of the manner of taking food and preparing it; the tone of
conversational and social life around the village fires, the existence
of strong friendships or hostilities, and of passing sympathies and
dislikes between people; the subtle yet unmistakable manner in which
personal vanities and ambitions are reflected in the behaviour of
the individual and in the emotional reactions of those who surround
him. All these facts can and ought to be scientifically formulated and
recorded, but it is necessary that this be done, not by a superficial
registration of details, as is usually done by untrained observers,
but with an effort at penetrating the mental attitude expressed in
them. And that is the reason why the work of scientifically trained
observers, once seriously applied to the study of this aspect, will,
I believe, yield results of surpassing value. So far, it has been
done only by amateurs, and therefore done, on the whole, indifferently.

Indeed, if we remember that these imponderable yet all important facts
of actual life are part of the real substance of the social fabric,
that in them are spun the innumerable threads which keep together
the family, the clan, the village community, the tribe--their
significance becomes clear. The more crystallised bonds of social
grouping, such as the definite ritual, the economic and legal duties,
the obligations, the ceremonial gifts and formal marks of regard,
though equally important for the student, are certainly felt less
strongly by the individual who has to fulfil them. Applying this to
ourselves, we all know that "family life" means for us, first and
foremost, the atmosphere of home, all the innumerable small acts and
attentions in which are expressed the affection, the mutual interest,
the little preferences, and the little antipathies which constitute
intimacy. That we may inherit from this person, that we shall have to
walk after the hearse of the other, though sociologically these facts
belong to the definition of "family" and "family life," in personal
perspective of what family truly is to us, they normally stand very
much in the background.

Exactly the same applies to a native community, and if the Ethnographer
wants to bring their real life home to his readers, he must on no
account neglect this. Neither aspect, the intimate, as little as
the legal, ought to be glossed over. Yet as a rule in ethnographic
accounts we have not both but either the one or the other--and, so
far, the intimate one has hardly ever been properly treated. In all
social relations besides the family ties, even those between mere
tribesmen and, beyond that, between hostile or friendly members of
different tribes, meeting on any sort of social business, there is
this intimate side, expressed by the typical details of intercourse,
the tone of their behaviour in the presence of one another. This
side is different from the definite, crystalised legal frame of the
relationship, and it has to be studied and stated in its own right.

In the same way, in studying the conspicuous acts of tribal life,
such as ceremonies, rites, festivities, etc., the details and tone of
behaviour ought to be given, besides the bare outline of events. The
importance of this may be exemplified by one instance. Much has
been said and written about survival. Yet the survival character
of an act is expressed in nothing as well as in the concomitant
behaviour, in the way in which it is carried out. Take any example
from our own culture, whether it be the pomp and pageantry of a
state ceremony, or a picturesque custom kept up by street urchins,
its "outline" will not tell you whether the rite flourishes still
with full vigour in the hearts of those who perform it or assist at
the performance or whether they regard it as almost a dead thing,
kept alive for tradition's sake. But observe and fix the data of
their behaviour, and at once the degree of vitality of the act will
become clear. There is no doubt, from all points of sociological,
or psychological analysis, and in any question of theory, the manner
and type of behaviour observed in the performance of an act is of the
highest importance. Indeed behaviour is a fact, a relevant fact, and
one that can be recorded. And foolish indeed and short-sighted would
be the man of science who would pass by a whole class of phenomena,
ready to be garnered, and leave them to waste, even though he did
not see at the moment to what theoretical use they might be put!

As to the actual method of observing and recording in field-work
these imponderabilia of actual life and of typical behaviour, there
is no doubt that the personal equation of the observer comes in here
more prominently, than in the collection of crystalised, ethnographic
data. But here also the main endeavour must be to let facts speak for
themselves. If in making a daily round of the village, certain small
incidents, characteristic forms of taking food, of conversing, of
doing work (see for instance Plate III) are found occurring over and
over again, they should be noted down at once. It is also important
that this work of collecting and fixing impressions should begin
early in the course of working out a district. Because certain subtle
peculiarities, which make an impression as long as they are novel,
cease to be noticed as soon as they become familiar. Others again can
only be perceived with a better knowledge of the local conditions. An
ethnographic diary, carried on systematically throughout the course
of one's work in a district would be the ideal instrument for this
sort of study. And if, side by side with the normal and typical,
the ethnographer carefully notes the slight, or the more pronounced
deviations from it, he will be able to indicate the two extremes
within which the normal moves.

In observing ceremonies or other tribal events, such, for instance as
the scene depicted in Plate IV, it is necessary, not only to note down
those occurrences and details which are prescribed by tradition and
custom to be the essential course of the act, but also the Ethnographer
ought to record carefully and precisely, one after the other, the
actions of the actors and of the spectators. Forgetting for a moment
that he knows and understands the structure of this ceremony, the
main dogmatic ideas underlying it, he might try to find himself only
in the midst of an assembly of human-beings, who behave seriously or
jocularly, with earnest concentration or with bored frivolity, who
are either in the same mood as he finds them every day, or else are
screwed up to a high pitch of excitement, and so on and so on. With his
attention constantly directed to this aspect of tribal life, with the
constant endeavour to fix it, to express it in terms of actual fact,
a good deal of reliable and expressive material finds its way into
his notes. He will be able to "set" the act into its proper place in
tribal life, that is to show whether it is exceptional or commonplace,
one in which the natives behave ordinarily, or one in which their
whole behaviour is transformed. And he will also be able to bring
all this home to his readers in a clear, convincing manner.

Again, in this type of work, it is good for the Ethnographer sometimes
to put aside camera, note book and pencil, and to join in himself
in what is going on. He can take part in the natives' games, he can
follow them on their visits and walks, sit down and listen and share
in their conversations. I am not certain if this is equally easy
for everyone--perhaps the Slavonic nature is more plastic and more
naturally savage than that of Western Europeans--but though the degree
of success varies, the attempt is possible for everyone. Out of such
plunges into the life of the natives--and I made them frequently not
only for study's sake but because everyone needs human company--I
have carried away a distinct feeling that their behaviour, their
manner of being, in all sorts of tribal transactions, became more
transparent and easily understandable than it had been before. All
these methodological remarks, the reader will find again illustrated
in the following chapters.




VIII

Finally, let us pass to the third and last aim of scientific
field-work, to the last type of phenomenon which ought to be recorded
in order to give a full and adequate picture of native culture. Besides
the firm outline of tribal constitution and crystallised cultural
items which form the skeleton, besides the data of daily life and
ordinary behaviour, which are, so to speak, its flesh and blood,
there is still to be recorded the spirit--the natives' views and
opinions and utterances. For, in every act of tribal life, there is,
first, the routine prescribed by custom and tradition, then there
is the manner in which it is carried out, and lastly there is the
commentary to it, contained in the natives' mind. A man who submits
to various customary obligations, who follows a traditional course
of action, does it impelled by certain motives, to the accompaniment
of certain feelings, guided by certain ideas. These ideas, feelings,
and impulses are moulded and conditioned by the culture in which
we find them, and are therefore an ethnic peculiarity of the given
society. An attempt must be made therefore, to study and record them.

But is this possible? Are these subjective states not too elusive and
shapeless? And, even granted that people usually do feel or think
or experience certain psychological states in association with the
performance of customary acts, the majority of them surely are not
able to formulate these states, to put them into words. This latter
point must certainly be granted, and it is perhaps the real Gordian
knot in the study of the facts of social psychology. Without trying to
cut or untie this knot, that is to solve the problem theoretically,
or to enter further into the field of general methodology, I shall
make directly for the question of practical means to overcome some
of the difficulties involved.

First of all, it has to be laid down that we have to study here
stereotyped manners of thinking and feeling. As sociologists, we
are not interested in what A or B may feel qua individuals, in the
accidental course of their own personal experiences--we are interested
only in what they feel and think qua members of a given community. Now
in this capacity, their mental states receive a certain stamp, become
stereotyped by the institutions in which they live, by the influence
of tradition and folk-lore, by the very vehicle of thought, that is
by language. The social and cultural environment in which they move
forces them to think and feel in a definite manner. Thus, a man who
lives in a polyandrous community cannot experience the same feelings
of jealousy, as a strict monogynist, though he might have the elements
of them. A man who lives within the sphere of the Kula cannot become
permanently and sentimentally attached to certain of his possessions,
in spite of the fact that he values them most of all. These examples
are crude, but better ones will be found in the text of this book.

So, the third commandment of field-work runs: Find out the typical
ways of thinking and feeling, corresponding to the institutions and
culture of a given community, and formulate the results in the most
convincing manner. What will be the method of procedure? The best
ethnographical writers--here again the Cambridge school with Haddon,
Rivers, and Seligman rank first among English Ethnographers--have
always tried to quote verbatim statements of crucial importance. They
also adduce terms of native classification; sociological, psychological
and industrial termini technici, and have rendered the verbal contour
of native thought as precisely as possible. One step further in this
line can be made by the Ethnographer, who acquires a knowledge of
the native language and can use it as an instrument of inquiry. In
working in the Kiriwinian language, I found still some difficulty in
writing down the statement directly in translation which at first I
used to do in the act of taking notes. The translation often robbed
the text of all its significant characteristics--rubbed off all its
points--so that gradually I was led to note down certain important
phrases just as they were spoken, in the native tongue. As my knowledge
of the language progressed, I put down more and more in Kiriwinian,
till at last I found myself writing exclusively in that language,
rapidly taking notes, word for word, of each statement. No sooner had
I arrived at this point, than I recognised that I was thus acquiring
at the same time an abundant linguistic material, and a series of
ethnographic documents which ought to be reproduced as I had fixed
them, besides being utilised in the writing up of my account. [12]
This corpus inscriptionum Kiriwiniensium can be utilised, not only
by myself, but by all those who, through their better penetration
and ability of interpreting them, may find points which escape my
attention, very much as the other corpora form the basis for the
various interpretations of ancient and prehistoric cultures; only,
these ethnographic inscriptions are all decipherable and clear,
have been almost all translated fully and unambiguously, and have
been provided with native cross-commentaries or scholia obtained from
living sources.

No more need be said on this subject here, as later on a whole chapter
(Chapter XVIII) is devoted to it, and to its exemplification by several
native texts. The Corpus will of course be published separately at
a later date.




IX

Our considerations thus indicate that the goal of ethnographic
field-work must be approached through three avenues:

1. The organisation of the tribe, and the anatomy of its culture
must be recorded in firm, clear outline. The method of concrete,
statistical documentation is the means through which such an outline
has to be given.

2. Within this frame, the imponderabilia of actual life, and the
type of behaviour have to be filled in. They have to be collected
through minute, detailed observations, in the form of some sort of
ethnographic diary, made possible by close contact with native life.

3. A collection of ethnographic statements, characteristic narratives,
typical utterances, items of folk-lore and magical formulæ has to be
given as a corpus inscriptionum, as documents of native mentality.

These three lines of approach lead to the final goal, of which an
Ethnographer should never lose sight. This goal is, briefly, to grasp
the native's point of view, his relation to life, to realise his vision
of his world. We have to study man, and we must study what concerns
him most intimately, that is, the hold which life has on him. In
each culture, the values are slightly different; people aspire after
different aims, follow different impulses, yearn after a different
form of happiness. In each culture, we find different institutions
in which man pursues his life-interest, different customs by which he
satisfies his aspirations, different codes of law and morality which
reward his virtues or punish his defections. To study the institutions,
customs, and codes or to study the behaviour and mentality without the
subjective desire of feeling by what these people live, of realising
the substance of their happiness--is, in my opinion, to miss the
greatest reward which we can hope to obtain from the study of man.

These generalities the reader will find illustrated in the following
chapters. We shall see there the savage striving to satisfy certain
aspirations, to attain his type of value, to follow his line of
social ambition. We shall see him led on to perilous and difficult
enterprises by a tradition of magical and heroical exploits, shall
see him following the lure of his own romance. Perhaps as we read
the account of these remote customs there may emerge a feeling of
solidarity with the endeavours and ambitions of these natives. Perhaps
man's mentality will be revealed to us, and brought near, along
some lines which we never have followed before. Perhaps through
realising human nature in a shape very distant and foreign to us,
we shall have some light shed on our own. In this, and in this case
only, we shall be justified in feeling that it has been worth our
while to understand these natives, their institutions and customs,
and that we have gathered some profit from the Kula.









CHAPTER I

THE COUNTRY AND INHABITANTS OF THE KULA DISTRICT


I

The tribes who live within the sphere of the Kula system of trading
belong, one and all--with the exception perhaps, of the Rossel
Island natives, of whom we know next to nothing--to the same racial
group. These tribes inhabit the easternmost end of the mainland of
New Guinea and those islands, scattered in the form of the long-drawn
archipelago, which continue in the same south-easternly trend as
the mainland, as if to bridge over the gap between New Guinea and
the Solomons.

New Guinea is a mountainous island-continent, very difficult of access
in its interior, and also at certain portions of the coast, where
barrier reefs, swamps and rocks practically prevent landing or even
approach for native craft. Such a country would obviously not offer the
same opportunities in all its parts to the drifting migrations which
in all probability are responsible for the composition of the present
population of the South Seas. The easily accessible portions of the
coast and the outlying islands would certainly offer a hospitable
reception to immigrants of a higher stock; but, on the other hand,
the high hills, the impregnable fastnesses in swampy flats and shores
where landing was difficult and dangerous, would give easy protection
to the aborigines, and discourage the influx of migrators.

The actual distribution of races in New Guinea completely justifies
these hypotheses. Map II shows the Eastern part of the main island
and archipelagoes of New Guinea and the racial distribution of the
natives. The interior of the continent, the low sago swamps and deltas
of the Gulf of Papua--probably the greater part of the North Coast and
of the South-West Coast of New Guinea, are inhabited by a "relatively
tall, dark-skinned, frizzly-haired" race, called by Dr. Seligman
Papuan, and in the hills more especially by pygmy tribes. We know
little about these people, swamp tribes and hill tribes alike, who
probably are the autochtons in this part of the world. [13] As we shall
also not meet them in the following account, it will be better to pass
to the tribes who inhabit the accessible parts of New Guinea. "The
Eastern Papuasians, that is, the generally smaller, lighter coloured,
frizzly-haired races of the eastern peninsula of New Guinea and its
archipelagoes now require a name, and since the true Melanesian element
is dominant in them, they may be called Papuo-Melanesians. With regard
to these Eastern Papuasians, Dr. A. C. Haddon first recognised that
they came into the country as the result of a 'Melanesian migration
into New Guinea,' and further, 'That a single wandering would not
account for certain puzzling facts.'" [14] The Papuo-Melanesians
again can be divided into two groups, a Western and an Eastern one,
which, following Dr. Seligman's terminology, we shall call the Western
Papuo-Melanesians and the Massim respectively. It is with these latter
we shall become acquainted in the following pages.

If we glance at a map and follow the orographical features of Eastern
New Guinea and its coast line, we see at once that the high main
range of mountains drops off between the 149th and 150th meridians,
and again that the fringing reef disappears at the same point,
that is, at the west end of Orangerie Bay. This means that the
extreme East End of New Guinea, with its archipelagoes, in other
words, the Massim country, is the most easily accessible area,
and might be expected to be inhabited by a homogeneous stock of
people, consisting of immigrants almost unmixed with the autochtons
(Cf. Map II). "Indeed, while the condition actually existing in the
Massim area suggests that there was no slow mingling of the invaders
with a previous stock, the geographical features of the territory of
the Western Papuo-Melanesians with its hills, mountains and swamps,
are such that invaders could not have speedily overrun the country,
nor failed to have been influenced by the original inhabitants..." [15]

I shall assume that the reader is acquainted with the quoted work of
Dr. Seligman, where a thorough account is given of all the main types
of Papuo-Melanesian sociology and culture one after the other. But
the tribes of the Eastern Papuo-Melanesian or Massim area, must be
described here somewhat more in detail, as it is within this fairly
homogeneous area that the Kula takes place. Indeed, the Kula sphere
of influence and the ethnographic area of the Massim tribes almost
completely overlap, and we can speak about the Kula type of culture
and the Massim culture almost synonymously.




II

The adjacent Map III shows the Kula district, that is, the easternmost
end of the main island and the archipelagoes lying to its East
and North-East. As Professor C. G. Seligman says: "This area can
be divided into two parts, a small northern portion comprising the
Trobriands, the Marshall Bennets, the Woodlarks (Murua), as well as
a number of smaller islands such as the Laughlans (Nada), and a far
larger southern portion comprising the remainder of the Massim domain"
(op. cit., p. 7).

This division is represented on Map III by the thick line isolating
to the North the Amphletts, the Trobriands, the small Marshall
Bennet Group, Woodlark Island and the Laughlan Group. The Southern
portion, I found convenient to divide further into two divisions
by a vertical line, leaving to the East Misima, Sud-Est Island and
Rossel Island. As our information about this district is extremely
scanty, I have preferred to exclude it from the area of the Southern
Massim. In this excluded area, only the natives of Misima enter into
the Kula, but their participation will play a very small part only in
the following account. The western segment, and this is the part of
which we shall speak as the district of the Southern Massim, comprises
first the East End of the mainland, the few adjacent islands, Sariba,
Roge'a, Side'a, and Basilaki; to the South, the island of Wari, to
the East the important, though small archipelago of Tubetube (Engineer
Group); and to the North, the big archipelago of the d'Entrecasteaux
Islands. From this latter, only one district, that of Dobu, interests
us more specially. The culturally homogeneous tribes of the Southern
Massim have been marked off on our map as district V, the Doubans as
district IV.

Returning to the two main divisions into the Southern and Northern
portion, this latter is occupied by a very homogeneous population,
homogeneous both in language and culture, and in the clear recognition
of their own ethnic unity. To quote further Professor Seligman, it
"is characterised by the absence of cannibalism, which, until put
down by the Government, existed throughout the remaining portion of
the district; another peculiarity of the Northern Massim is their
recognition" in certain districts, though not in all, of chieftains
who wield extensive powers (op. cit. p. 7). The natives of that
northern area used to practise--I say used because wars are a thing
of the past--a type of warfare open and chivalrous, very different
from the raids of the Southern Massim. Their villages are built in
big compact blocks, and they have storehouses on piles for storing
food, distinct from their rather miserable dwellings, which stand
directly on the ground and are not raised on piles. As can be seen
on the map, it has been necessary to sub-divide this Northern Massim
further into three groups, first, that of the Trobriand Islanders,
or the Boyowans (the Western Branch); secondly that of the natives
of Woodlark Island and the Marshall Bennets (the Eastern Branch);
and, thirdly, the small group of the Amphlett natives.

The other big sub-division of the Kula tribes is composed of the
Southern Massim, of which, as just said, the western branch mainly
concerns us. These last natives are smaller in stature, and with,
broadly speaking, a much less attractive appearance than those
of the North. [16] They live in widely scattered communities,
each house or group of houses standing in its own little grove
of palm and fruit trees, apart from the others. Formerly they were
cannibals and head-hunters, and used to make unexpected raids on their
adversaries. There is no chieftainship, authority being exercised by
the elders in each community. They build very elaborately constructed
and beautifully decorated houses on piles.

I have found it necessary for the purpose of this study to cut out of
the western branch of the southern portion of the Massim the two areas
(marked IV and V on the Map III), as they are of special importance to
the Kula. It must, however, be borne in mind that our present knowledge
does not allow of any final classification of the Southern Massim.

Such are the general characteristics of the Northern and Southern
Massim respectively, given in a few words. But before proceeding with
our subject, it will be good to give a short but more detailed sketch
of each of these tribes. I shall begin with the southernmost section,
following the order in which a visitor, travelling from Port Moresby
with the Mail boat, would come in contact with these districts,
the way indeed in which I received my first impressions of them. My
personal knowledge of the various tribes is, however, very uneven,
based on a long residence among the Trobriand Islanders (District I),
on a month's study of the Amphletts (District III); on a few weeks
spent in Woodlark Island or Murua (District II), the neighbourhood
of Samarai (District V), and the South Coast of New Guinea (also V);
and on three short visits to Dobu (District IV). My knowledge of some
of the remaining localities which enter into the Kula is derived
only from a few conversations I had with natives of this district,
and on second-hand information derived from white residents. The
work of Professor C. G. Seligman, however, supplements my personal
acquaintance in so far as the districts of Tubetube, Woodlark Island,
the Marshall Bennets, and several others are concerned.

The whole account of the Kula will therefore naturally be given
from the perspective, so to speak, of the Trobriand district. This
district is often called in this book by its native name, Boyowa,
and the language is spoken of as Kiriwinian, Kiriwina being the main
province of the district, and its language considered by the natives
as a standard speech. But I may add at once that in studying the
Kula in that part, I ipso facto studied its adjacent branches between
the Trobriands and the Amphletts, between the Trobriands and Kitava,
and between the Trobriands and Dobu; seeing not only the preparations
and departures in Boyowa, but also the arrival of the natives from
other districts, in fact, following one or two of such expeditions
in person. [17] Moreover, the Kula being an international affair,
the natives of one tribe know more about Kula customs abroad than
they would about any other subject. And in all its essentials, the
customs and tribal rules of the exchange are identical throughout
the whole Kula area.




III

Let us imagine that we are sailing along the South coast of New
Guinea towards its Eastern end. At about the middle of Orangerie Bay
we arrive at the boundary of the Massim, which runs from this point
north-westwards till it strikes the northern coast near Cape Nelson
(see Map II). As mentioned before, the boundary of the district
inhabited by this tribe corresponds to definite geographical
conditions, that is, to the absence of natural, inland fastnesses,
or of any obstacles to landing. Indeed, it is here that the Great
Barrier Reef becomes finally submerged, while again the Main Range
of mountains, which follows up to this point, always separated from
the foreshore by minor ranges, comes to an end.

Orangerie Bay is closed, on its Eastern side, by a headland, the
first of a series of hills, rising directly out of the sea. As we
approach the land, we can see distinctly the steep, folded slopes,
covered with dense, rank jungle, brightened here and there by bold
patches of lalang grass. The coast is broken first by a series of
small, land-locked bays or lagoons; then, after Fife Bay, come one or
two larger bays, with a flat, alluvial foreshore, and then from South
Cape the coast stretches in an almost unbroken line, for several miles,
to the end of the mainland.

The East End of New Guinea is a tropical region, where the distinction
between the dry and wet season is not felt very sharply. In fact,
there is no pronounced dry season there, and so the land is always
clad in intense, shining green, which forms a crude contrast with
the blue sea. The summits of the hills are often shrouded in trailing
mist, whilst white clouds brood or race over the sea, breaking up the
monotony of saturated, stiff blue and green. To someone not acquainted
with the South Sea landscape it is difficult to convey the permanent
impression of smiling festiveness, the alluring clearness of the beach,
fringed by jungle trees and palms, skirted by white foam and blue
sea, above it the slopes ascending in rich, stiff folds of dark and
light green, piebald and shaded over towards the summit by steamy,
tropical mists.

When I first sailed along this coast, it was after a few months'
residence and field work in the neighbouring district of the
Mailu. From Toulon Island, the main centre and most important
settlement of the Mailu, I used to look towards the East end of
Orangerie Bay, and on clear days I could see the pyramidal hills of
Bonabona, of Gadogado'a, as blue silhouettes in the distance. Under
the influence of my work, I came to regard this country within the
somewhat narrow native horizon, as the distant land to which perilous,
seasonal voyages are made, from whence come certain objects--baskets,
decorated carvings, weapons, ornaments--particularly well formed, and
superior to the local ones; the land to which the natives point with
awe and distrust, when speaking of specially evil and virulent forms
of sorcery; the home of a folk mentioned with horror as cannibals. Any
really fine touch of artistic taste, in Mailu carvings, would always
be directly imported or imitated from the East, and I also found that
the softest and most melodious songs and the finest dances came from
the Massim. Many of their customs and institutions would be quoted
to me as quaint and unusual, and thus, I, the ethnographer working
on the borderland of two cultures, naturally had my interest and
curiosity aroused. It seemed as if the Eastern people must be much
more complex, in one direction towards the cruel, man-eating savage,
in the other towards the finely-gifted, poetical lord of primitive
forest and seas, when I compared them with the relatively coarse and
dull native of Mailu. No wonder, therefore, that on approaching their
coast--travelling on that occasion in a small launch--I scanned the
landscape with keen interest, anxious to catch my first glimpse of
natives, or of their traces.

The first distinctly visible signs of human existence in this
neighbourhood are the patches of garden land. These big clearings,
triangular in shape, with the apex pointing uphill, look as if they
were plastered on to the steep slopes. From August to November, the
season when the natives cut and burn the bush, they can be seen,
at night, alight with slowly-blazing logs, and in daytime, their
smoke clings over the clearings, and slowly drifts along the hill
side. Later on in the year, when the plantation sprouts, they form
a bright spot, with the light green of their fresh leaves.

The villages in this district are to be found only on the foreshore,
at the foot of the hills, hidden in groves of trees, with here and
there a golden or purplish bit of thatch showing through the dark
green of the leaves. In calm weather a few canoes are probably not
far off, fishing. If the visitor is lucky enough to pass at the time
of feasts, trading expeditions, or any other big tribal gathering,
many a fine sea-going canoe may be seen approaching the village with
the sound of conch shells blowing melodiously.


In order to visit one of the typical, large settlements of these
natives, let us say near Fife Bay, on the South coast, or on the island
of Sariba, or Roge'a, it would be best to go ashore in some big,
sheltered bay, or on one of the extensive beaches at the foot of a
hilly island. We enter a clear, lofty grove, composed of palms, bread
fruit, mangoes, and other fruit trees, often with a sandy subsoil,
well weeded-out and clean, where grow clumps of ornamental bushes,
such as the red-flowering hybiscus, croton or aromatic shrub. Here we
find the village. Fascinating as may be the Motuan habitations standing
on high piles in the middle of a lagoon, or the neat streets of an
Aroma or Mailu settlement, or the irregular warren of small huts on
the Trobriand coast, all these cannot compete in picturesqueness or
charm with the villages of the Southern Massim. When, on a hot day,
we enter the deep shadow of fruit trees and palms, and find ourselves
in the midst of the wonderfully designed and ornamented houses hiding
here and there in irregular groups among the green, surrounded by
little decorative gardens of shells and flowers, with pebble-bordered
paths and stone-paved sitting circles, it seems as if the visions of
a primeval, happy, savage life were suddenly realised, even if only
in a fleeting impression. Big bodies of canoes are drawn high up the
beach and covered with palm leaves; here and there nets are drying,
spread out on special stands, and on the platforms in front of the
houses sit groups of men and women, busy at some domestic work,
smoking and chatting.

Walking along the paths which lead on for miles, we come every few
hundred yards on another hamlet of a few houses. Some of these are
evidently new and freshly decorated, while others are abandoned,
and a heap of broken household objects is lying on the ground,
showing that the death of one of the village elders has caused it to
be deserted. As the evening approaches, the life becomes more active,
fires are kindled, and the natives busy themselves cooking and eating
food. In the dancing season, towards dusk, groups of men and women
foregather, singing, dancing, and beating drums.

When we approach the natives closer and scan their personal appearance,
we are struck--if we compare them with their Western neighbours--by
the extreme lightness of their skin, their sturdy, even lumpy stature,
and a sort of soft, almost effete general impression which their
physique produces. Their fat, broad faces, their squashed noses, and
frequently oblique eyes, make them appear quaint and grotesque rather
than impressively savage. Their hair, not so woolly as that of the pure
Papuans, nor growing into the enormous halo of the Motuans, is worn in
big mops, which they often cut at the sides so as to give the head an
oblong, almost cylindrical shape. Their manner is shy and diffident,
but not unfriendly--rather smiling and almost servile, in very great
contrast to the morose Papuan, or the unfriendly, reserved South Coast
Mailu or Aroma. On the whole, they give at first approach not so much
the impression of wild savages as of smug and self-satisfied bourgeois.

Their ornaments are much less elaborate and more toned down than
those of their Western neighbours. Belts and armlets plaited of a dark
brown fern vine, small red shell disks and turtle shell rings as ear
ornaments are the only permanent, every-day decorations worn. Like all
Melanesians of Eastern New Guinea, they are quite cleanly in their
persons, and a personal approach to them does not offend any of our
senses. They are very fond of red hibiscus flowers stuck in their
hair, of scented flower wreaths on their head, of aromatic leaves
thrust into their belts and armlets. Their grand, festive head-dress
is extremely modest compared with the enormous erections of feathers
used by the Western tribes, and consists mainly of a round halo of
white cockatoo feathers stuck into their hair (see Plate V and VI).

In olden days, before the advent of white men, these pleasant,
apparently effete people were inveterate cannibals and head-hunters,
and in their large war-canoes they carried on treacherous, cruel
raids, falling upon sleeping villages, killing man, woman and child,
and feasting on their bodies. The attractive stone circles in their
villages were associated with their cannibal feasts. [18]

The traveller, who could settle down in one of their villages and
remain there sufficiently long to study their habits and enter into
their tribal life, would soon be struck by the absence of a well
recognised general authority. In this, however, the natives resemble
not only the other Western Melanesians of New Guinea, but also the
natives of the Melanesian Archipelago. The authority in the Southern
Massim tribe, as in many others, is vested in the village elders. In
each hamlet the eldest man has a position of personal influence and
power, and these collectively would in all cases represent the tribe
and carry out and enforce their decisions--always arrived at in strict
accord with tribal tradition.

Deeper sociological study would reveal the characteristic totemism
of these natives, and also the matrilineal construction of their
society. Descent, inheritance, and social position follow the
female line--a man always belongs to his mother's totemic division
and local group, and inherits from his mother's brother. Women also
enjoy a very independent position, and are exceedingly well treated,
and in tribal and festive affairs they play a prominent part (see
Plates V and VI). Some women, even, owing to their magical powers,
wield a considerable influence. [19]

The sexual life of these natives is extremely lax. Even when we
remember the very free standard of sex morals in the Melanesian
tribes of New Guinea, such as the Motu or the Mailu, we still find
these natives exceedingly loose in such matters. Certain reserves
and appearances which are usually kept up in other tribes, are here
completely abandoned. As is probably the case in many communities
where sex morals are lax, there is a complete absence of unnatural
practices and sex perversions. Marriage is concluded as the natural
end of a long and lasting liaison. [20]

These natives are efficient and industrious manufacturers, and great
traders. They own large sea-going canoes, which, however, they do
not manufacture themselves, but which they import from the Northern
Massim district, or from Panayati. Another feature of their culture,
which we shall meet again, consists of their big feasts, called So'i
(see Plates V and VI), associated with mortuary celebrations and
with a special mortuary taboo called gwara. In the big inter-tribal
trading of the Kula, these feasts play a considerable rôle.

This general, and necessarily somewhat superficial description,
is meant to give the reader a definite impression of these tribes,
provide them, so to speak, with a physiognomy, rather than to give
a full account of their tribal constitution. For this the reader is
referred to Professor C. G. Seligman's treatise, our main source of
knowledge on the Melanesians of New Guinea. The above sketch refers
to what Professor Seligman calls the Southern Massim, or more exactly
to the portion marked off in the Ethnographic sketch Map No. III as
"V, the Southern Massim"--the inhabitants of the Easternmost mainland
and the adjacent archipelago.




IV

Let us now move North, towards the district marked "IV, the
Dobu," in our map, which forms one of the most important links
in the chain of Kula and a very influential centre of cultural
influence. As we sail North, passing East Cape, the Easternmost
point of the main island--a long, flat promontory covered with
palms and fruit belts, and harbouring a very dense population--a
new world, new both geographically and ethnographically, opens up
before us. At first it is only a faint, bluish silhouette, like
a shadow of a distant mountain range, hovering far north over the
horizon. As we approach, the hills of Normanby, the nearest of three
big islands of the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago, become clearer and
take more definite shape and substance. A few high summits stand
out more distinctly through the usual tropical haze, among them the
characteristic double-peaked top of Bwebweso, the mountain where,
according to native legend, the spirits of the dead in these parts
lead their latter existence. The South Coast of Normanby, and the
interior are inhabited by a tribe or tribes of which we know nothing
ethnographically, except that they differ culturally from the rest
of their neighbours. These tribes also take no direct part in the Kula.

The Northern end of Normanby, both sides of the Dawson Straits
which separate the two islands of Normanby and Fergusson, and the
South-eastern tip of Fergusson, are inhabited by a very important
tribe, the Dobu. The heart of their district is the small extinct
volcano forming an island at the Eastern entrance to Dawson
Straits--Dobu, after which island they are named. To reach it, we
have to sail through this extremely picturesque channel. On either
side of the winding, narrow strait, green hills descend, and close it
in, till it is more like a mountain lake. Here and there they recede,
and a lagoon opens out. Or again they rise in fairly steep slopes, on
which there can be plainly seen triangular gardens, native houses on
piles, large tracts of unbroken jungle and patches of grass land. As
we proceed, the narrow straits broaden, and we see on our right a
wide flank of Mt. Sulomona'i on Normanby Island. On our left, there
is a shallow bay, and behind it a large, flat plain, stretching far
into the interior of Fergusson Island, and over it, we look into wide
valleys, and on to several distant mountain ranges. After another
turn, we enter a big bay, on both sides bordered by a flat foreshore,
and in the middle of it rises out of a girdle of tropical vegetation,
the creased cone of an extinct volcano, the island of Dobu.

We are now in the centre of a densely populated and ethnographically
important district. From this island, in olden days, fierce and daring
cannibal and head-hunting expeditions were periodically launched, to
the dread of the neighbouring tribes. The natives of the immediately
surrounding districts, of the flat foreshore on both sides of the
straits, and of the big neighbouring islands were allies. But the
more distant districts, often over a hundred miles away by sail,
never felt safe from the Dobuans. Again, this was, and still is,
one of the main links in the Kula, a centre of trade, industries and
general cultural influence. It is characteristic of the international
position of the Dobuans that their language is spoken as a lingua
franca all over the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago, in the Amphletts,
and as far north as the Trobriands. In the southern part of these
latter islands, almost everyone speaks Dobuan, although in Dobu
the language of the Trobriands or Kiriwinian is hardly spoken by
anyone. This is a remarkable fact, which cannot be easily explained
in terms of the present conditions, as the Trobrianders, if anything,
are on a higher level of cultural development than Dobuans, are more
numerous, and enjoy the same general prestige. [21]

Another remarkable fact about Dobu and its district is that it is
studded with spots of special, mythological interest. Its charming
scenery, of volcanic cones, of wide, calm bays, and lagoons overhung
by lofty, green mountains, with the reef-riddled, island-strewn ocean
on the North, has deep, legendary meaning for the native. Here is the
land and sea where the magically inspired sailors and heroes of the dim
past performed feats of daring and power. As we sail from the entrance
into Dawson Straits, through Dobu and the Amphletts to Boyowa, almost
every new configuration of the land which we pass is the scene of some
legendary exploit. Here the narrow gorge has been broken through by a
magic canoe flying in the air. There the two rocks standing in the sea
are the petrified bodies of two mythological heroes who were stranded
at this spot after a quarrel. Here again, a land-locked lagoon has
been a port of refuge to a mythical crew. Apart from its legends,
the scenery before us, fine as it is, derives still more charm from
the knowledge that it is, and has been a distant Eldorado, a land
of promise and hope to generation after generation of really daring
native sailors from the Northern islands. And in the past these lands
and seas must have been the scene of migrations and fights, of tribal
invasions, and of gradual infiltrations of peoples and cultures.

In personal appearance, the Dobuans have a very distinct physique,
which differentiates them sharply from the Southern Massim and from the
Trobrianders; very dark-skinned, small of stature, with big heads and
rounded shoulders, they give a strange, almost gnome-like impression
on a first encounter. In their manner, and their tribal character,
there is something definitely pleasant, honest and open--an impression
which long acquaintance with them confirms and strengthens. They are
the general favourites of the whites, form the best and most reliable
servants, and traders who have resided long among them compare them
favourably with other natives.

Their villages, like those of the previously described Massim, are
scattered over wide areas. The fertile and flat foreshores which
they inhabit are studded with small, compact hamlets of a dozen or
so houses, hidden in the midst of one continuous plantation of fruit
trees, palms, bananas and yams. The houses are built on piles, but
are cruder architecturally than those of the S. Massim, and almost
without any decorations, though in the olden days of head-hunting
some of them were ornamented with skulls.

In their social constitution, the people are totemic, being divided
into a number of exogamous clans with linked totems. There is no
institution of regular chieftainship, nor have they any system of
rank or caste such as we shall meet in the Trobriands. Authority is
vested in the elders of the tribe. In each hamlet there is a man who
wields the greatest influence locally, and acts as its representative
on such tribal councils as may arise in connection with ceremonies
and expeditions.

Their system of kinship is matrilineal, and women hold a very good
position, and wield great influence. They also seem to take a much
more permanent and prominent part in tribal life than is the case among
the neighbouring populations. There is notably one of the features of
Dobuan society, which seems to strike the Trobrianders as peculiar,
and to which they will direct attention while giving information,
even although in the Trobriands also women have a good enough social
position. In Dobu, women take an important part in gardening, and
have a share in performing garden magic, and this in itself gives
them a high status. Again, the main instrument for wielding power
and inflicting penalties in these lands, sorcery, is to a great
extent in the hands of women. The flying witches, so characteristic
of the Eastern New Guinea type of culture, here have one of their
strongholds. We shall have to go into this subject more in detail
when speaking about shipwreck and the dangers of sailing. Besides
this, women practice ordinary sorcery, which in other tribes is only
man's prerogative.

As a rule, amongst natives, a high position of women is associated with
sex laxity. In this, Dobu is an exception. Not only are married women
expected to remain faithful, and adultery considered a great crime,
but, in sharp contrast to all surrounding tribes, the unmarried girls
of Dobu remain strictly chaste. There are no ceremonial or customary
forms of licence, and an intrigue would be certainly regarded as
an offence.

A few more words must be said here about sorcery, as this is a matter
of great importance in all inter-tribal relations. The dread of sorcery
is enormous, and when the natives visit distant parts, this dread is
enhanced by the additional awe of the unknown and foreign. Besides
the flying witches, there are, in Dobu, men and women who, by their
knowledge of magical spells and rites, can inflict disease and cause
death. The methods of these sorcerers, and all the beliefs clustering
round this subject are very much the same as those in the Trobriands
which we shall meet later on. These methods are characterised by
being very rational and direct, and implying hardly any supernatural
element. The sorcerer has to utter a spell over some substance, and
this must be administered by mouth, or else burnt over the fire in
the victim's hut. The pointing stick is also used by the sorcerers
in certain rites.

If his methods are compared with those used by flying witches, who
eat the heart and lungs, drink the blood, snap the bones of their
enemies, and moreover possess the powers of invisibility and of flying,
the Dobuan sorcerer seems to have but simple and clumsy means at his
disposal. He is also very much behind his Mailu or Motu namesakes--I
say namesakes, because sorcerers throughout the Massim are called
Bara'u, and the same word is used in Mailu, while the Motu use the
reduplicated Babara'u. The magicians in these parts use such powerful
methods as those of killing the victim first, opening up the body,
removing, lacerating or charming the inside, then bringing the victim
to life again, only that he may soon sicken and eventually die. [22]

According to Dobuan belief, the spirits of the dead go to the top
of Mt. Bwebweso on Normanby Island. This confined space harbours
the shades of practically all the natives of the d'Entrecasteaux
Archipelago, except those of Northern Goodenough Island, who, as I was
told by some local informants, go after death to the spirit land of
the Trobrianders. [23] The Dobuans have also the belief in a double
soul--one, shadowy and impersonal, surviving the bodily death for a
few days only, and remaining in the vicinity of the grave, the other
the real spirit, who goes to Bwebweso.

It is interesting to note how natives, living on the boundary
between two cultures and between two types of belief, regard the
ensuing differences. A native of, say, Southern Boyowa, confronted
with the question:--how it is that the Dobuans place spirit-land on
Bwebweso, whereas they, the Trobrianders, place it in Tuma?--does not
see any difficulty in solving the problem. He does not regard the
difference as due to a dogmatic conflict in doctrine. Quite simply
he answers:--"Their dead go to Bwebweso and ours to Tuma." The
metaphysical laws of existence are not yet considered subject to
one invariable truth. As human destinies in life change, according
to varieties in tribal custom, so also the doings of the spirit! An
interesting theory is evolved to harmonise the two beliefs in a mixed
case. There is a belief that if a Trobriander were to die in Dobu,
when on a Kula expedition, he would go for a time to Bwebweso. In
due season, the spirits of the Trobrianders would sail from Tuma,
the spirit land, to Bwebweso, on a spirit Kula, and the newly departed
one would join their party and sail with them back to Tuma.

On leaving Dobu, we sail the open sea, a sea studded with coral patches
and sand-banks, and seamed with long barrier reefs, where treacherous
tides, running sometimes as much as five knots, make sailing really
dangerous, especially for helpless native craft. This is the Kula sea,
the scene of the inter-tribal expeditions and adventures which will
be the theme of our future descriptions.

The Eastern shore of Ferguson Island, near Dobu, along which we are
sailing, consists first of a series of volcanic cones and capes,
giving the landscape the aspect of something unfinished and crudely
put together. At the foot of the hills there stretches for several
miles beyond Dobu a broad alluvial flat covered with villages--Deide'i,
Tu'utauna, Bwayowa, all important centres of trade, and the homes of
the direct Kula partners of the Trobrianders. Heavy fumes can be seen
floating above the jungle, coming from the hot geysers of Deide'i,
which spurt up in high jets every few minutes.

Soon we come abreast of two characteristically shaped, dark rocks,
one half hidden in the vegetation of the shore, the other standing
in the sea at the end of a narrow sand-spit dividing the two. These
are Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a, two men turned into stone, as mythical
tradition has it. Here the big sailing expeditions, those starting
northwards from Dobu, as well as those arriving from the North,
still make a halt--just as they have done for centuries, and, under
observation of many taboos, give sacrificial offerings to the stones,
with ritual invocations for propitious trade.

In the lee of these two rocks, runs a small bay with a clean, sandy
beach, called Sarubwoyna. Here a visitor, lucky enough to pass at
the right moment of the right season would see a picturesque and
interesting scene. There before him would lie a huge fleet of some
fifty to a hundred canoes, anchored in the shallow water, with swarms
of natives upon them, all engaged in some strange and mysterious
task. Some of these, bent over heaps of herbs, would be mumbling
incantations; others would be painting and adorning their bodies. An
onlooker of two generations ago coming upon the same scene would no
doubt have been led to suspect that he was watching the preparations
for some dramatic tribal contest, for one of those big onslaughts in
which the existence of whole villages and tribes were wiped out. It
would even have been difficult for him to discern from the behaviour
of the natives whether they were moved more by fear or by the spirit of
aggression, as both these passions might have been read--and correctly
so--into their attitudes and movements. That the scene contained no
element of warfare; that this fleet had come here from about a hundred
miles sailing distance on a well regulated tribal visit; that it had
drawn up here for the final and most important preparations--this would
not have been an easy guess to make. Nowadays--for this is carried out
to this day with undiminished pomp--it would be an equally picturesque,
but of course, tamer affair, since the romance of danger has gone
from native life. As we learn in the course of this study to know
more about these natives, their general ways and customs, and more
especially about their Kula cycle of beliefs, ideas and sentiments,
we shall be able to look with understanding eyes upon this scene,
and comprehend this mixture of awe with intense, almost aggressive
eagerness and this behaviour, which appears cowed and fierce at the
same time.




V

Immediately after leaving Sarubwoyna and rounding the promontory
of the two rocks, we come in sight of the island of Sanaroa, a big,
sprawling, coral flat, with a range of volcanic hills on its western
side. On the wide lagoon to the East of this island are the fishing
grounds, where year after year the Trobrianders, returning from Dobu,
look for the valuable spondylus shell, which, after their arrival home,
is worked into the red discs, which form one of the main objects of
native wealth. In the North of Sanaroa there is a stone in one of
the tidal creeks called Sinatemubadiye'i, once a woman, the sister
of Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a, who, with her brothers came in here and
was petrified before the last stage of the journey. She also receives
offerings from canoes, coming either way on Kula expeditions.

Sailing further, some fine scenery unfolds itself on our left, where
the high mountain range comes nearer to the sea shore, and where
small bays, deep valleys and wooded slopes succeed one another. By
carefully scanning the slopes, we can see small batches of some three
to six miserable huts. These are the dwellings of the inhabitants,
who are of a distinctly lower culture than the Dobuans, take no part
in the Kula, and in olden days were the cowed and unhappy victims of
their neighbours.

On our right there emerge behind Sanaroa the islands of Uwama and
Tewara, the latter inhabited by Dobuan natives. Tewara is of interest
to us, because one of the myths which we shall get to know later on
makes it the cradle of the Kula. As we sail on, rounding one after
the other the Eastern promontories of Fergusson Island, a group
of strongly marked monumental profiles appears far on the horizon
from behind the receding headlands. These are the Amphlett Islands,
the link, both geographically and culturally, between the coastal
tribes of the volcanic region of Dobu and the inhabitants of the
flat coral archipelago of the Trobriands. This portion of the sea
is very picturesque, and has a charm of its own even in this land of
fine and varied scenery. On the main island of Fergusson, overlooking
the Amphletts from the South, and ascending straight out of the sea
in a slim and graceful pyramid, lies the tall mountain of Koyatabu,
the highest peak on the island. Its big, green surface is cut in half
by the white ribbon of a watercourse, starting almost half-way up and
running down to the sea. Scattered under the lea of Koyatabu are the
numerous smaller and bigger islands of the Amphlett Archipelago--steep,
rocky hills, shaped into pyramids, sphinxes and cupolas, the whole
a strange and picturesque assemblage of characteristic forms.

With a strong South-Easterly wind, which blows here for three quarters
of the year, we approach the islands very fast, and the two most
important ones, Gumawana and Ome'a, almost seem to leap out of the
mist. As we anchor in front of Gumawana village at the S.E. end of
the island, we cannot but feel impressed. Built on a narrow strip
of foreshore, open to the breakers, and squeezed down to the water's
edge by an almost precipitously rising jungle at its back, the village
has been made sea-proof by walls of stone surrounding the houses with
several bulwarks, and by stone dykes forming small artificial harbours
along the sea front. The shabby and unornamented huts, built on piles,
look very picturesque in these surroundings (see Plates VII and XLIII).

The inhabitants of this village, and of the four remaining ones in
the archipelago, are a queer people. They are a numerically weak
tribe, easily assailable from the sea, getting hardly enough to
eat from their rocky islands; and yet, through their unique skill
in pottery, their great daring and efficiency as sailors, and their
central position half way between Dobu and the Trobriands, they have
succeeded in becoming in several respects the monopolists of this part
of the world. They have also the main characteristics of monopolists:
grasping and mean, inhospitable and greedy, keen on keeping the trade
and exchange in their own hands, yet unprepared to make any sacrifice
towards improving it; shy, yet arrogant to anyone who has any dealings
with them; they contrast unfavourably with their southern and northern
neighbours. And this is not only the white man's impression. [24]
The Trobrianders, as well as the Dobuans, give the Amphlett natives
a very bad name, as being stingy and unfair in all Kula transactions,
and as having no real sense of generosity and hospitality.

When our boat anchors there, the natives approach it in their canoes,
offering clay pots for sale. But if we want to go ashore and have a
look at their village, there is a great commotion, and all the women
disappear from the open places. The younger ones run and hide in the
jungle behind the village, and even the old hags conceal themselves
in the houses. So that if we want to see the making of pottery,
which is almost exclusively women's work, we must first lure some
old woman out of her retreat with generous promises of tobacco and
assurances of honourable intentions.

This has been mentioned here, because it is of ethnographic interest,
as it is not only white men who inspire this shyness; if native
strangers, coming from a distance for trade, put in for a short time
in the Amphletts, the women also disappear in this fashion. This very
ostentatious coyness is, however, not a sham, because in the Amphletts,
even more than in Dobu, married and unmarried life is characterised
by strict chastity and fidelity. Women here have also a good deal of
influence, and take a great part in gardening and the performance of
garden magic. In social institutions and customs, the natives present
a mixture of Northern and Southern Massim elements. There are no
chiefs, but influential elders wield authority, and in each village
there is a head man who takes the lead in ceremonies and other big
tribal affairs. Their totemic clans are identical with those of Murua
(District II). Their somewhat precarious food supply comes partly
from the poor gardens, partly from fishing with kite and fish trap,
which, however, can only seldom be carried out, and does not yield very
much. They are not self-supporting, and receive, in form of presents
and by trade, a good deal of vegetable food as well as pigs from the
mainland, from Dobu and the Trobriands. In personal appearance they
are very much like the Trobrianders, that is, taller than the Dobuans,
lighter skinned, and with finer features.

We must now leave the Amphletts and proceed to the Trobriand Islands,
the scene of most of the occurrences described in this book, and
the country concerning which I possess by far the largest amount of
ethnographic information.









CHAPTER II

THE NATIVES OF THE TROBRIAND ISLANDS


I

Leaving the bronzed rocks and the dark jungle of the Amphletts for
the present--for we shall have to revisit them in the course of our
study, and then shall learn more about their inhabitants--we sail
North into an entirely different world of flat coral islands; into
an ethnographic district, which stands out by ever so many peculiar
manners and customs from the rest of Papuo-Melanesia. So far, we have
sailed over intensely blue, clear seas, where in shallow places the
coral bottom, with its variety of colour and form, with its wonderful
plant and fish life, is a fascinating spectacle in itself--a sea
framed in all the splendours of tropical jungle, of volcanic and
mountainous scenery, with lively watercourses and falls, with steamy
clouds trailing in the high valleys. From all this we take a final
farewell as we sail North. The outlines of the Amphletts soon fade
away in tropical haze, till only Koyatabu's slender pyramid, lifted
over them, remains on the horizon, the graceful form, which follows
us even as far as the Lagoon of Kiriwina.

We now enter an opaque, greenish sea, whose monotony is broken only
by a few sandbanks, some bare and awash, others with a few pandanus
trees squatting on their air roots, high in the sand. To these banks,
the Amphlett natives come and there they spend weeks on end, fishing
for turtle and dugong. Here is also laid the scene of several of
the mythical incidents of primeval Kula. Further ahead, through the
misty spray, the line of horizon thickens here and there, as if faint
pencil marks had been drawn upon it. These become more substantial,
one of them lengthens and broadens, the others spring into the distinct
shapes of small islands, and we find ourselves in the big Lagoon of
the Trobriands, with Boyowa, the largest island, on our right, and with
many others, inhabited and uninhabited, to the North and North-West.

As we sail in the Lagoon, following the intricate passages between
the shallows, and as we approach the main island, the thick, tangled
matting of the low jungle breaks here and there over a beach, and we
can see into a palm grove, like an interior, supported by pillars. This
indicates the site of a village. We step ashore on to the sea front,
as a rule covered with mud and refuse, with canoes drawn up high
and dry, and passing through the grove, we enter the village itself
(see Plate VIII).

Soon we are seated on one of the platforms built in front of a
yam-house, shaded by its overhanging roof. The round, grey logs, worn
smooth by contact with naked feet and bodies; the trodden ground of
the village-street; the brown skins of the natives, who immediately
surround the visitor in large groups--all these form a colour scheme
of bronze and grey, unforgettable to anyone, who, like myself, has
lived among these people.

It is difficult to convey the feelings of intense interest and suspense
with which an Ethnographer enters for the first time the district that
is to be the future scene of his field-work. Certain salient features,
characteristic of the place, at once rivet his attention, and fill
him with hopes or apprehensions. The appearance of the natives,
their manners, their types of behaviour, may augur well or ill for
the possibilities of rapid and easy research. One is on the lookout
for symptoms of deeper, sociological facts, one suspects many hidden
and mysterious ethnographic phenomena behind the commonplace aspect of
things. Perhaps that queer-looking, intelligent native is a renowned
sorcerer; perhaps between those two groups of men there exists some
important rivalry or vendetta which may throw much light on the
customs and character of the people if one can only lay hands upon
it? Such at least were my thoughts and feelings as on the day of my
arrival in Boyowa I sat scanning a chatting group of Trobriand natives.

The great variety in their physical appearance is what strikes one
first in Boyowa. [25] There are men and women of tall stature, fine
bearing, and delicate features, with clear-cut aquiline profile and
high foreheads, well formed nose and chin, and an open, intelligent
expression (see Plates IX, XV, XVII). And besides these, there are
others with prognathic, negroid faces, broad, thick-lipped mouths,
narrow foreheads, and a coarse expression (see Plates X, XI, XII). The
better featured have also a markedly lighter skin. Even their hair
differs, varying from quite straight locks to the frizzly mop of the
typical Melanesian. They wear the same classes of ornaments as the
other Massim, consisting mainly of fibre armlets and belts, earrings
of turtle shell and spondylus discs, and they are very fond of using,
for personal decoration, flowers and aromatic herbs. In manner they
are much freer, more familiar and confident, than any of the natives
we have so far met. As soon as an interesting stranger arrives, half
the village assembles around him, talking loudly and making remarks
about him, frequently uncomplimentary, and altogether assuming a tone
of jocular familiarity.

One of the main sociological features at once strikes an observant
newcomer--the existence of rank and social differentiation. Some of
the natives--very frequently those of the finer looking type--are
treated with most marked deference by others, and in return, these
chiefs and persons of rank behave in quite a different way towards the
strangers. In fact, they show excellent manners in the full meaning
of this word.

When a chief is present, no commoner dares to remain in a physically
higher position; he has to bend his body or squat. Similarly, when
the chief sits down, no one would dare to stand. The institution
of definite chieftainship, to which are shown such extreme marks of
deference, with a sort of rudimentary Court ceremonial, with insignia
of rank and authority, is so entirely foreign to the whole spirit
of Melanesian tribal life, that at first sight it transports the
Ethnographer into a different world. In the course of our inquiry,
we shall constantly meet with manifestation of the Kiriwinian chief's
authority, we shall notice the difference in this respect between the
Trobrianders and the other tribes, and the resulting adjustments of
tribal usage.




II

Another sociological feature, which forcibly obtrudes itself on the
visitor's notice is the social position of the women. Their behaviour,
after the cool aloofness of the Dobuan women, and the very uninviting
treatment which strangers receive from those of the Amphletts, comes
almost as a shock in its friendly familiarity. Naturally, here also,
the manners of women of rank are quite different from those of low
class commoners. But, on the whole, high and low alike, though by
no means reserved, have a genial, pleasant approach, and many of
them are very fine-looking (see Plates XI, XII). Their dress is also
different from any so far observed. All the Melanesian women in New
Guinea wear a petticoat made of fibre. Among the Southern Massim,
this fibre skirt is long, reaching to the knees or below, whereas in
the Trobriands it is much shorter and fuller, consisting of several
layers standing out round the body like a ruff (compare the S. Massim
women on Plates V and VI with the Trobrianders on Plate IV). The
highly ornamental effect of that dress is enhanced by the elaborate
decorations made in three colours on the several layers forming the
top skirt. On the whole, it is very becoming to fine young women,
and gives to small slender girls a graceful, elfish appearance.

Chastity is an unknown virtue among these natives. At an incredibly
early age they become initiated into sexual life, and many of the
innocent looking plays of childhood are not as innocuous as they
appear. As they grow up, they live in promiscuous free-love, which
gradually develops into more permanent attachments, one of which ends
in marriage. But before this is reached, unmarried girls are openly
supposed to be quite free to do what they like, and there are even
ceremonial arrangements by which the girls of a village repair in
a body to another place; there they publicly range themselves for
inspection, and each is chosen by a local boy, with whom she spends
a night. This is called katuyausi (see Plate XII). Again, when a
visiting party arrives from another district, food is brought to them
by the unmarried girls, who are also expected to satisfy their sexual
wants. At the big mortuary vigils round the corpse of a newly deceased
person, people from neighbouring villages come in large bodies to take
part in the wailing and singing. The girls of the visiting party are
expected by usage to comfort the boys of the bereaved village, in a
manner which gives much anguish to their official lovers. There is
another remarkable form of ceremonial licence, in which indeed women
are openly the initiators. During the gardening season, at the time of
weeding, the women do communal work, and any strange man who ventures
to pass through the district runs a considerable risk, for the women
will run after him, seize him, tear off his pubic leaf, and ill-treat
him orgiastically in the most ignominious manner. Side by side with
these ceremonial forms of licence, there go, in the normal course of
events, constant private intrigues, more intense during the festive
seasons, becoming less prominent as garden work, trading expeditions,
or harvesting take up the energies and attention of the tribe.

Marriage is associated with hardly any public or private rite or
ceremony. The woman simply joins her husband in his house, and later
on, there is a series of exchanges of gifts, which in no way can
be interpreted as purchase money for the wife. As a matter of fact,
the most important feature of the Trobriand marriage is the fact that
the wife's family have to contribute, and that in a very substantial
manner, to the economics of her household, and also they have to
perform all sorts of services for the husband. In her married life,
the woman is supposed to remain faithful to her husband, but this
rule is neither very strictly kept nor enforced. In all other ways,
she retains a great measure of independence, and her husband has to
treat her well and with consideration. If he does not, the woman simply
leaves him and returns to her family, and as the husband is as a rule
economically the loser by her action, he has to exert himself to get
her back--which he does by means of presents and persuasions. If she
chooses, she can leave him for good, and she can always find someone
else to marry.

In tribal life, the position of women is also very high. They do not as
a rule join the councils of men, but in many matters they have their
own way, and control several aspects of tribal life. Thus, some of
the garden work is their business; and this is considered a privilege
as well as a duty. They also look after certain stages in the big,
ceremonial divisions of food, associated with the very complete and
elaborate mortuary ritual of the Boyowans (see Plate IV). Certain
forms of magic--that performed over a first-born baby, beauty-magic
made at tribal ceremonies, some classes of sorcery--are also the
monopoly of women. Women of rank share the privileges incidental to
it, and men of low caste will bend before them and observe all the
necessary formalities and taboos due to a chief. A woman of chief's
rank, married to commoner, retains her status, even with regard to
her husband, and has to be treated accordingly.

The Trobrianders are matrilineal, that is, in tracing descent and
settling inheritance, they follow the maternal line. A child belongs
to the clan and village community of its mother, and wealth, as well
as social position, are inherited, not from father to son, but from
maternal uncle to nephew. This rule admits of certain important and
interesting exceptions, which we shall come across in the course of
this study.




III

Returning to our imaginary first visit ashore, the next interesting
thing to do, after we have sufficiently taken in the appearance and
manners of the natives, is to walk round the village. In doing this,
again we would come across much, which to a trained eye, would reveal
at once deeper sociological facts. In the Trobriands, however, it
would be better to make our first observations in one of the large,
inland villages, situated on even, flat ground with plenty of space,
so that it has been possible to build it in the typical pattern. In
the coastal villages, placed on marshy ground and coral outcrop,
the irregularity of the soil and cramped space have obliterated the
design, and they present quite a chaotic appearance. The big villages
of the central districts, on the other hands, are built one and all
with an almost geometrical regularity.

In the middle, a big circular space is surrounded by a ring of yam
houses. These latter are built on piles, and present a fine, decorative
front, with walls of big, round logs, laid crosswise on one another,
so as to leave wide interstices through which the stored yams can be
seen (see Plates XV, XXXII, XXXIII). Some of the store-houses strike
us at once as being better built, larger, and higher than the rest,
and these have also big, ornamented boards, running round the gable
and across it. These are the yam houses of the chief or of persons
of rank. Each yam house also has, as a rule, a small platform in
front of it, on which groups of men will sit and chat in the evening,
and where visitors can rest.

Concentrically with the circular row of yam houses, there runs a ring
of dwelling huts, and thus a street going all round the village is
formed between the two rows (see Plates III, IV, VIII). The dwellings
are lower than the yam houses, and instead of being on piles, are
built directly on the ground. The interior is dark and very stuffy,
and the only opening into it is through the door, and that is usually
closed. Each hut is occupied by one family (see Plate XV), that is,
husband, wife and small children, while adolescent and grown-up boys
and girls live in separate small bachelor's houses, harbouring some
two to six inmates. Chiefs and people of rank have their special,
personal houses, besides those of their wives. The Chief's house often
stands in the central ring of the store-houses facing the main place.

The broad inspection of the village would therefore reveal to
us the rôle of decoration as insignia of rank, the existence of
bachelors' and spinsters' houses, the great importance attached to
the yam-harvest--all these small symptoms which, followed up, would
lead us deep into the problems of native sociology. Moreover, such
an inspection would have led us to inquire as to the part played by
the different divisions of the village in tribal life. We should then
learn that the baku, the central circular space, is the scene of public
ceremonies and festivities, such as dancing (see Plates XIII, XIV),
division of food, tribal feasts, mortuary vigils, in short, of all
doings that represent the village as a whole. In the circular street
between the stores and living houses, everyday life goes on, that is,
the preparation of food, the eating of meals, and the usual exchange
of gossip and ordinary social amenities. The interior of the houses
is only used at night, or on wet days, and is more a sleeping than
a living room. The backs of the houses and the contiguous groves are
the scene of the children's play and the women's occupations. Further
away, remote parts of the grove are reserved for sanitary purposes,
each sex having its own retreat.

The baku (central place) is the most picturesque part, and there the
somewhat monotonous colour scheme of the brown and grey is broken by
the overhanging foliage of the grove, seen above the neat fronts and
gaudy ornamentation of the yam-houses and by the decorations worn by
the crowd when a dance or ceremony is taking place (see Plates XIII,
XXXIII). Dancing is done only at one time in the year, in connection
with the harvest festivities, called milamala, at which season also
the spirits of the dead return from Tuma, the nether-world, to the
villages from which they hail. Sometimes the dancing season lasts only
for a few weeks or even days, sometimes it is extended into a special
dancing period called usigola. During such a time of festivities,
the inhabitants of a village will dance day after day, for a month
or longer, the period being inaugurated by a feast, punctuated by
several more, and ending in a big culminating performance. At this
many villages assist as spectators, and distributions of food take
place. During an usigola, dancing is done in full dress, that is,
with facial painting, floral decorations, valuable ornaments, and
a head-dress of white cockatoo feathers (see Plates XIII, XIV). A
performance consists always of a dance executed in a ring to the
accompaniment of singing and drum-beating, both of which are done by
a group of people standing in the middle. Some dances are done with
the carved dancing shield.

Sociologically, the village is an important unit in the
Trobriands. Even the mightiest chief in the Trobriands wields his
authority primarily over his own village and only secondarily over the
district. The village community exploit jointly their garden lands,
perform ceremonies, wage warfare, undertake trading expeditions,
and sail in the same canoe or fleet of canoes as one group.

After the first inspection of the village, we would be naturally
interested to know more of the surrounding country, and would take a
walk through the bush. Here, however, if we hoped for a picturesque
and varied landscape, we should receive a great disappointment. The
extensive, flat island consists only of one fertile plain, with a
low coral ridge running along portions of the coast. It is almost
entirely under intermittent cultivation, and the bush, regularly
cleared away every few years, has no time to grow high. A low, dense
jungle grows in a matted tangle, and practically wherever we move
on the island we walk along between two green walls, presenting no
variety, allowing of no broader view. The monotony is broken only
by an occasional clump of old trees left standing--usually a tabooed
place--or by one of the numerous villages which we meet with every mile
or two in this densely populated country. The main element, both of
picturesqueness and ethnographic interest, is afforded by the native
gardens. Each year about one quarter or one fifth of the total area
is under actual cultivation as gardens, and these are well tended,
and present a pleasant change from the monotony of the scrub. In
its early stages, the garden site is simply a bare, cleared space,
allowing of a Wider outlook upon the distant coral ridge in the East,
and upon the tall groves, scattered over the horizon, which indicate
villages or tabooed tree clumps. Later on, when the yam-vines, taro,
and sugar cane begin to grow and bud, the bare brown soil is covered
with the fresh green of the tender plants. After some more time still,
tall, stout poles are planted over each yam-plant; the vine climbs
round them, grows into a full, shady garland of foliage, and the
whole makes the impression of a large, exuberant hop-yard.




IV

Half of the natives' working life is spent in the garden, and around
it centres perhaps more than half of his interests and ambitions. And
here we must pause and make an attempt to understand his attitude
in this matter, as it is typical of the way in which he goes about
all his work. If we remain under the delusion that the native is a
happy-go-lucky, lazy child of nature, who shuns as far as possible
all labour and effort, waiting till the ripe fruits, so bountifully
supplied by generous tropical Nature, fall into his mouth, we shall not
be able to understand in the least his aims and motives in carrying
out the Kula or any other enterprise. On the contrary, the truth is
that the native can and, under circumstances, does work hard, and
work systematically, with endurance and purpose, nor does he wait
till he is pressed to work by his immediate needs.

In gardening, for instance, the natives produce much more than they
actually require, and in any average year they harvest perhaps twice as
much as they can eat. Nowadays, this surplus is exported by Europeans
to feed plantation hands in other parts of New Guinea; in olden days
it was simply allowed to rot. Again, they produce this surplus in a
manner which entails much more work than is strictly necessary for
obtaining the crops. Much time and labour is given up to æsthetic
purposes, to making the gardens tidy, clean, cleared of all debris;
to building fine, solid fences, to providing specially strong and big
yam-poles. All these things are to some extent required for the growth
of the plant; but there can be no doubt that the natives push their
conscientiousness far beyond the limit of the purely necessary. The
non-utilitarian element in their garden work is still more clearly
perceptible in the various tasks which they carry out entirely for
the sake of ornamentation, in connection with magical ceremonies,
and in obedience to tribal usage. Thus, after the ground has been
scrupulously cleared and is ready for planting, the natives divide
each garden plot into small squares, each a few yards in length and
width, and this is done only in obedience to usage, in order to make
the gardens look neat. No self-respecting man would dream of omitting
to do this. Again, in especially well trimmed gardens, long horizontal
poles are tied to the yam supports in order to embellish them. Another,
and perhaps the most interesting example of non-utilitarian work
is afforded by the big, prismatic erections called kamkokola, which
serve ornamental and magical purposes, but have nothing to do with
the growth of plants (comp. Plate LIX).

Among the forces and beliefs which bear upon and regulate garden work,
perhaps magic is the most important. It is a department of its own,
and the garden magician, next to the chief and the sorcerer, is the
most important personage of the village. The position is hereditary,
and, in each village, a special system of magic is handed on in the
female line from one generation to another. I have called it a system,
because the magician has to perform a series of rites and spells over
the garden, which run parallel with the labour, and which, in fact,
initiate each stage of the work and each new development of the plant
life. Even before any gardening is begun at all, the magician has to
consecrate the site with a big ceremonial performance in which all
the men of the village take part. This ceremony officially opens the
season's gardening, and only after it is performed do the villagers
begin to cut the scrub on their plots. Then, in a series of rites,
the magician inaugurates successively all the various stages which
follow one another--the burning of the scrub, the clearing, the
planting, the weeding and the harvesting. Also, in another series
of rites and spells, he magically assists the plant in sprouting,
in budding, in bursting into leaf, in climbing, in forming the rich
garlands of foliage, and in producing the edible tubers.

The garden magician, according to native ideas, thus controls both
the work of man and the forces of Nature. He also acts directly
as supervisor of gardening, sees to it that people do not skimp
their work, or lag behind with it. Thus magic is a systematising,
regulating, and controlling influence in garden work. The magician,
in carrying out the rites, sets the pace, compels people to apply
themselves to certain tasks, and to accomplish them properly and
in time. Incidentally, magic also imposes on the tribe a good deal
of extra work, of apparently unnecessary, hampering taboos and
regulations. In the long run, however, there is no doubt that by its
influence in ordering, systematising and regulating work, magic is
economically invaluable for the natives. [26]

Another notion which must be exploded, once and for ever, is that of
the Primitive Economic Man of some current economic text books. This
fanciful, dummy creature, who has been very tenacious of existence
in popular and semi-popular economic literature, and whose shadow
haunts even the minds of competent anthropologists, blighting their
outlook with a preconceived idea, is an imaginary, primitive man,
or savage, prompted in all his actions by a rationalistic conception
of self-interest, and achieving his aims directly and with the
minimum of effort. Even one well established instance should show
how preposterous is this assumption that man, and especially man on
a low level of culture, should be actuated by pure economic motives
of enlightened self-interest. The primitive Trobriander furnishes
us with such an instance, contradicting this fallacious theory. He
works prompted by motives of a highly complex, social and traditional
nature, and towards aims which are certainly not directed towards
the satisfaction of present wants, or to the direct achievement of
utilitarian purposes. Thus, in the first place, as we have seen,
work is not carried out on the principle of the least effort. On
the contrary, much time and energy is spent on wholly unnecessary
effort, that is, from a utilitarian point of view. Again, work and
effort, instead of being merely a means to an end, are, in a way an
end in themselves. A good garden worker in the Trobriands derives
a direct prestige from the amount of labour he can do, and the size
of garden he can till. The title tokwaybagula, which means "good" or
"efficient gardener," is bestowed with discrimination, and borne with
pride. Several of my friends, renowned as tokwaybagula, would boast to
me how long they worked, how much ground they tilled, and would compare
their efforts with those of less efficient men. When the labour, some
of which is done communally, is being actually carried out, a good
deal of competition goes on. Men vie with one another in their speed,
in their thoroughness, and in the weights they can lift, when bringing
big poles to the garden, or in carrying away the harvested yams.

The most important point about this is, however, that all, or almost
all the fruits of his work, and certainly any surplus which he can
achieve by extra effort, goes not to the man himself, but to his
relatives-in-law. Without entering into details of the system of
the apportionment of the harvest, of which the sociology is rather
complex and would require a preliminary account of the Trobriand
kinship system and kinship ideas, it may be said that about three
quarters of a man's crops go partly as tribute to the chief, partly
as his due to his sister's (or mother's) husband and family.

But although he thus derives practically no personal benefit in
the utilitarian sense from his harvest, the gardener receives much
praise and renown from its size and quality, and that in a direct
and circumstantial manner. For all the crops, after being harvested,
are displayed for some time afterwards in the gardens, piled up in
neat, conical heaps under small shelters made of yam vine. Each man's
harvest is thus exhibited for criticism in his own plot, and parties
of natives walk about from garden to garden, admiring, comparing and
praising the best results. The importance of the food display can be
gauged by the fact that, in olden days, when the chief's power was
much more considerable than now, it was dangerous for a man who was
not either of high rank himself, or working for such a one, to show
crops which might compare too favourably with those of the chief.

In years when the harvest promises to be plentiful, the chief will
proclaim a kayasa harvest, that is to say, ceremonial, competitive
display of food, and then the straining for good results and the
interest taken in them are still higher. We shall meet later on with
ceremonial enterprises of the kayasa type, and find that they play a
considerable part in the Kula. All this shows how entirely the real
native of flesh and bone differs from the shadowy Primitive Economic
Man, on whose imaginary behaviour many of the scholastic deductions
of abstract economics are based. [27] The Trobriander works in a
roundabout way, to a large extent for the sake of the work itself,
and puts a great deal of æsthetic polish on the arrangement and
general appearance of his garden. He is not guided primarily by the
desire to satisfy his wants, but by a very complex set of traditional
forces, duties and obligations, beliefs in magic, social ambitions
and vanities. He wants, if he is a man, to achieve social distinction
as a good gardener and a good worker in general.

I have dwelt at this length upon these points concerning the motives
and aims of the Trobrianders in their garden work, because, in the
chapters that follow, we shall be studying economic activities, and
the reader will grasp the attitude of the natives best if he has it
illustrated to him by various examples. All that has been said in this
matter about the Trobrianders applies also to the neighbouring tribes.




V

With the help of this new insight gained into the mind of the native,
and into their social scheme of harvest distribution, it will be
easier to describe the nature of the chief's authority. Chieftainship
in the Trobriands is the combination of two institutions: first,
that of headmanship, or village authority; secondly, that of totemic
clanship, that is the division of the community into classes or castes,
each with a certain more or less definite rank.

In every community in the Trobriands, there is one man who wields the
greatest authority, though often this does not amount to very much. He
is, in many cases, nothing more than the Primus inter pares in a group
of village elders, who deliberate on all important matters together,
and arrive at a decision by common consent. It must not be forgotten
that there is hardly ever much room for doubt or deliberation,
as natives communally, as well as individually, never act except on
traditional and conventional lines. This village headman is, as a rule,
therefore, not much more than a master of tribal ceremonies, and the
main speaker within and without the tribe, whenever one is needed.

But the position of headman becomes much more than this, when he
is a person of high rank, which is by no means always the case. In
the Trobriands there exist four totemic clans, and each of these
is divided into a number of smaller sub-clans,--which could also
be called families or castes, for the members of each claim common
descent from one ancestress, and each of them holds a certain,
specified rank. These sub-clans have also a local character, because
the original ancestress emerged from a hole in the ground, as a rule
somewhere in the neighbourhood of their village community. There is
not one sub-clan in the Trobriands whose members cannot indicate its
original locality, where their group, in the form of the ancestress,
first saw the light of the sun. Coral outcrops, water-holes, small
caves or grottoes, are generally pointed out as the original "holes"
or "houses," as they are called. Often such a hole is surrounded by
one of the tabooed clumps of trees alluded to before. Many of them
are situated in the groves surrounding a village, and a few near the
sea shore. Not one is on the cultivable land.

The highest sub-clan is that of the Tabalu, belonging to the Malasi
totem clan. To this sub-clan belongs the main chief of Kiriwina,
To'uluwa, who resides in the village of Omarakana (see Plate II and
Frontispiece). He is in the first place the headman of his own village,
and in contrast to the headmen of low rank, he has quite a considerable
amount of power. His high rank inspires everyone about him with the
greatest and most genuine respect and awe, and the remnants of his
power are still surprisingly large, even now, when white authorities,
very foolishly and with fatal results, do their utmost to undermine
his prestige and influence.

Not only does the chief--by which word I shall designate a headman
of rank--possess a high degree of authority within his own village,
but his sphere of influence extends far beyond it. A number of
villages are tributary to him, and in several respects subject to
his authority. In case of war, they are his allies, and have to
foregather in his village. When he needs men to perform some task,
he can send to his subject villages, and they will supply him with
workers. In all big festivities the villages of his district will
join, and the chief will act as master of ceremonies. Nevertheless,
for all these services rendered to him he has to pay. He even has to
pay for any tributes received out of his stores of wealth. Wealth,
in the Trobriands, is the outward sign and the substance of power,
and the means also of exercising it. But how does he acquire his
wealth? And here we come to the main duty of the vassal villages to
the chief. From each subject village, he takes a wife, whose family,
according to the Trobriand law, has to supply him with large amounts of
crops. This wife is always the sister or some relation of the headman
of the subject village, and thus practically the whole community has
to work for him. In olden days, the chief of Omarakana had up to as
many as forty consorts, and received perhaps as much as thirty to
fifty per cent. of all the garden produce of Kiriwina. Even now,
when his wives number only sixteen, he has enormous storehouses,
and they are full to the roof with yams every harvest time.

With this supply, he is able to pay for the many services he
requires, to furnish with food the participants in big feasts,
in tribal gatherings or distant expeditions. Part of the food he
uses to acquire objects of native wealth, or to pay for the making
of them. In brief, through his privilege of practising polygamy, the
chief is kept supplied with an abundance of wealth in food stuffs and
in valuables, which he uses to maintain his high position; to organise
tribal festivities and enterprises, and to pay, according to custom,
for the many personal services to which he is entitled.

One point in connection with the chief's authority deserves special
mention. Power implies not only the possibility of rewarding, but
also the means of punishing. This in the Trobriands is as a rule done
indirectly, by means of sorcery. The chief has the best sorcerers
of the district always at his beck and call. Of course he also has
to reward them when they do him a service. If anyone offends him,
or trespasses upon his authority, the chief summons the sorcerer, and
orders that the culprit shall die by black magic. And here the chief
is powerfully helped in achieving his end by the fact that he can do
this openly, so that everybody, and the victim himself knows that a
sorcerer is after him. As the natives are very deeply and genuinely
afraid of sorcery, the feeling of being hunted, of imagining themselves
doomed, is in itself enough to doom them in reality. Only in extreme
cases, does a chief inflict direct punishment on a culprit. He has
one or two hereditary henchmen, whose duty it is to kill the man who
has so deeply offended him, that actual death is the only sufficient
punishment. As a matter of fact, very few cases of this are on record,
and it is now, of course, entirely in abeyance.

Thus the chief's position can be grasped only through the realisation
of the high importance of wealth, of the necessity of paying for
everything, even for services which are due to him, and which could
not be withheld. Again, this wealth comes to the chief from his
relations-in-law, and it is through his right to practise polygamy
that he actually achieves his position, and exercises his power.

Side by side with this rather complex mechanism of authority, the
prestige of rank, the direct recognition of his personal superiority,
give the chief an immense power, even outside his district. Except
for the few of his own rank, no native in the Trobriands will remain
erect when the great chief of Omarakana approaches, even in these
days of tribal disintegration. Wherever he goes, he is considered
as the most important person, is seated on a high platform, and
treated with consideration. Of course the fact that he is accorded
marks of great deference, and approached in the manner as if he were
a supreme despot, does not mean that perfect good fellowship and
sociability do not reign in his personal relations with his companions
and vassals. There is no difference in interests or outlook between
him and his subjects. They sit together and chat, they exchange
village gossip, the only difference being that the chief is always
on his guard, and much more reticent and diplomatic than the other,
though he is no less interested. The chief, unless he is too old,
joins in dances and even in games, and indeed he takes precedence as
a matter of course.


In trying to realise the social conditions among the Trobrianders
and their neighbours, it must not be forgotten that their social
organisation is in certain respects complex and ill-defined. Besides
very definite laws which are strictly obeyed, there exist a number
of quaint usages, of vague graduations in rules, of others where the
exceptions are so many, that they rather obliterate the rule than
confirm it. The narrow social outlook of the native who does not
see beyond his own district, the prevalence of singularities and
exceptional cases is one of the leading characteristics of native
sociology, one which for many reasons has not been sufficiently
recognised. But the main outlines of chieftainship here presented,
will be enough to give a clear idea of it and of some of the flavour
of their institutions, as much, in fact, as is necessary, in order
to understand the chief's rôle in the Kula. But it must to a certain
extent be supplemented by the concrete data, bearing upon the political
divisions of the Trobriands.

The most important chief is, as said, the one who resides in Omarakana
and rules Kiriwina, agriculturally the richest and most important
district. His family, or sub-clan, the Tabalu, are acknowledged to
have by far the highest rank in all the Archipelago. Their fame is
spread over the whole Kula district; the entire province of Kiriwina
derives prestige from its chief, and its inhabitants also keep all
his personal taboos, which is a duty but also a distinction. Next to
the high chief, there resides in a village some two miles distant,
a personage who, though in several respects his vassal, is also his
main foe and rival, the headman of Kabwaku, and ruler of the province
of Tilataula. The present holder of this title is an old rogue named
Moliasi. From time to time, in the old days, war used to break out
between the two provinces, each of which could muster some twelve
villages for the fight. These wars were never very bloody or of
long duration, and they were in many ways fought in a competitive,
sporting manner, since, unlike with the Dobuans and Southern Massim,
there were neither head-hunting nor cannibalistic practices among
the Boyowans. Nevertheless, defeat was a serious matter. It meant
a temporary destruction of the loser's villages, and exile for a
year or two. After that, a ceremony of reconciliation took place,
and friend and foe would help to rebuild the villages. [28] The ruler
of Tilataula has an intermediate rank, and outside his district he
does not enjoy much prestige; but within it, he has a considerable
amount of power, and a good deal of wealth, in the shape of stored
food and ceremonial articles. All the villages under his rule, have,
of course, their own independent headman, who, being of low rank,
have only a small degree of local authority.

In the West of the big, Northern half of Boyowa (that is of the main
island of the Trobriand Group) are again two districts, in past
times often at war with one another. One of them, Kuboma, subject
to the chief of Gumilababa, of high rank, though inferior to the
chief of Kiriwina, consists of some ten inland villages, and is very
important as a centre of industry. Among these villages are included
those of Yalaka, Buduwaylaka, Kudukwaykela, where the quicklime is
prepared for betel chewing, and also the lime pots made. The highly
artistic designs, burnt in on the lime pots, are the speciality of
these villagers, but unfortunately the industry is fast decaying. The
inhabitants of Luya are renowned for their basket work, of which the
finest specimens are their production. But the most remarkable of all
is the village of Bwoytalu, whose inhabitants are at the same time
the most despised pariahs, the most dreaded sorcerers, and the most
skilful and industrious craftsmen in the island. They belong to several
sub-clans, all originating in the neighbourhood of the village, near
which also, according to tradition, the original sorcerer came out of
the soil in the form of a crab. They eat the flesh of bush-pigs, and
they catch and eat the stingaree, both objects of strict taboos and of
genuine loathing to the other inhabitants of Northern Boyowa. For this
reason they are despised and regarded as unclean by the others. In
olden days they would have to crouch lower and more abjectly than
anyone else. No man or woman would mate with anyone from Bwoytalu,
whether in marriage or in an intrigue. Yet in wood carving, and
especially in the working out of the wonderful, round dishes, in the
manufacture of plaited fibre work, and in the production of combs, they
are far more skilful than anyone else, and acknowledged to be such;
they are the wholesale manufacturers of these objects for export,
and they can produce work not to be rivalled by any other village.

The five villages lying on the western coast of the northern half,
on the shores of the Lagoon, form the district of Kulumata. They are
all fishing villages, but differ in their methods, and each has its
own fishing grounds and its own methods of exploiting them. [29]
The district is much less homogeneous than any of those before
mentioned. It possesses no paramount chief, and even in war the
villagers used not to fight on the same side. But it is impossible
to enter here into all these shades and singularities of political
organisation.

In the southern part of Boyowa, there is first the province of Luba,
occupying the waist of the island, the part where it narrows down
to a long isthmus. This part is ruled by a chief of high rank, who
resides in Olivilevi. He belongs to the same family as the chief of
Omarakana, and this southern dominion is the result of a younger line's
having branched off some three generations ago. This happened after an
unsuccessful war, when the whole tribe of Kiriwina fled south to Luba,
and lived there for two years in a temporary village. The main body
returned afterwards, but a number remained behind with the chief's
brother, and thus the village of Olivilevi was founded. Wawela,
which was formerly a very big village, now consists of hardly more
than twenty huts. The only one on the Eastern shore which lies
right on the sea, it is very picturesquely situated, overlooking a
wide bay with a clean beach. It is of importance as the traditional
centre of astronomical knowledge. From here, for generation after
generation up to the present day, the calendar of the natives has
been regulated. This means that some of the most important dates are
fixed, especially that of the great annual festival, the Milamala,
always held at full moon. Again, Wawela is one of the villages where
the second form of sorcery, that of the flying witches, has its main
Trobriand home. In fact, according to native belief, this form of
sorcery has its seat only in the Southern half, and is unknown to the
women in the North, though the Southern witches extend their field
of operations all over Boyowa. Wawela, which lies facing the East,
and which is always in close touch with the villages of Kitava and
the rest of the Marshall Bennetts, shares with these islands the
reputation of harbouring many women who can fly, kill by magic, who
also feed on corpses, and are especially dangerous to seamen in peril.

Further down to the South, on the Western shore of the Lagoon, we come
to the big settlement of Sinaketa, consisting of some six villages
lying within a few hundred yards from one another, but each having
its own headman and a certain amount of local characteristics. These
villages form, however, one community for purposes of war and of
the Kula. Some of the local headmen of Sinaketa claim the highest
rank, some are commoners; but on the whole, both the principle of
rank and the power of the chief break down more and more as we move
South. Beyond Sinaketa, we meet a few more villages, who practice a
local Kula, and with whom we shall have to deal later on. Sinaketa
itself will loom very largely in the descriptions that follow. The
Southern part of the island is sometimes called Kaybwagina, but it does
not constitute a definite political unit, like the Northern districts.

Finally, south of the main island, divided from it by a narrow channel,
lies the half-moon-shaped island of Vakuta, to which belong four small
villages and one big one. Within recent times, perhaps four to six
generations ago, there came down and settled in this last mentioned one
a branch of the real Tabalu, the chiefly family of highest rank. But
their power here never assumed the proportions even of the small
chiefs of Sinaketa. In Vakuta, the typical Papuo-Melanesian system of
government by tribal elders--with one more prominent than the others,
but not paramount--is in full vigour.

The two big settlements of Sinaketa and Vakuta play a great part
in the Kula, and they also are the only two communities in the
whole Trobriands where the red shell discs are made. This industry,
as we shall see, is closely associated with the Kula. Politically,
Sinaketa and Vakuta are rivals, and in olden days were periodically
at war with one another.

Another district which forms a definite political and cultural unit
is the large island of Kayleula, in the West. The inhabitants are
fishermen, canoe-builders, and traders, and undertake big expeditions
to the western d'Entrecasteaux islands, trading for betel-nut, sago,
pottery and turtle shell in exchange for their own industrial produce.

It has been necessary to give a somewhat detailed description of
chieftainship and political divisions, as a firm grasp of the main,
political institutions is essential to the understanding of the
Kula. All departments of tribal life, religion, magic, economics
are interwoven, but the social organisation of the tribe lies at the
foundation of everything else. Thus it is essential to bear in mind
that the Trobriands form one cultural unit, speaking the same language,
having the same institutions, obeying the same laws and regulations,
swayed by the same beliefs and conventions. The districts just
enumerated, into which the Trobriands are sub-divided, are distinct
politically and not culturally; that is, each of them comprises the
same kind of natives, only obeying or at least acknowledging their
own chief, having their own interests and pursuits, and in case of
war each fighting their own fight.

Again, within each district, the several village communities have
each a great deal of independence. A village community is represented
by a headman, its members make their gardens in one block and under
the guidance of their own garden magician; they carry on their own
feasts and ceremonial arrangements, mourn their dead in common, and
perform, in remembrance of their departed ones, an endless series of
food distributions. In all big affairs, whether of the district or
of the tribe, members of a village community keep together, and act
in one group.




VI

Right across the political and local divisions cut the totemic clans,
each having a series of linked totems, with a bird as principal
one. [30] The members of these four clans are scattered over the whole
tribe of Boyowa, and in each village community, members of all four are
to be found, and even in every house, there are at least two classes
represented, since a husband must be of a different clan from his wife
and children. There is a certain amount of solidarity within the clan,
based on the very vague feeling of communal affinity to the totem
birds and animals, but much more on the many social duties, such as
the performance of certain ceremonies, especially the mortuary ones,
which band the members of a clan together. But real solidarity obtains
only between members of a sub-clan. A sub-clan is a local division of
a clan, whose members claim common ancestry, and hence real identity
of bodily substance, and also are attached to the locality where
their ancestors emerged. It is to these sub-clans that the idea
of a definite rank attaches. One of the totemic clans, the Malasi,
includes the most aristocratic sub-clan, the Tabalu, as well as the
lowest one, the local division of the Malasi in Bwoytalu. A chief of
the Tabalu feels very insulted if it is ever hinted that he is akin
to one of the stingaree-eaters of the unclean village, although they
are Malasi like himself. The principle of rank attached to totemic
divisions is to be met only in Trobriand sociology; it is entirely
foreign to all the other Papuo-Melanesian tribes.

As regards kinship, the main thing to be remembered is that the natives
are matrilineal, and that the succession of rank, membership in all
the social groups, and the inheritance of possessions descend in the
maternal line. The mother's brother is considered the real guardian of
a boy, and there is a series of mutual duties and obligations, which
establish a very close and important relation between the two. The
real kinship, the real identity of substance is considered to exist
only between a man and his mother's relations. In the first rank of
these, his brothers and sisters are specially near to him. For his
sister or sisters he has to work as soon as they are grown up and
married. But, in spite of that, a most rigorous taboo exists between
them, beginning quite early in life. No man would joke and talk freely
in the presence of his sister, or even look at her. The slightest
allusion to the sexual affairs, whether illicit or matrimonial, of
a brother or sister in the presence of the other, is the deadliest
insult and mortification. When a man approaches a group of people
where his sister is talking, either she withdraws or he turns away.

The father's relation to his children is remarkable. Physiological
fatherhood [31] is unknown, and no tie of kinship or relationship
is supposed to exist between father and child, except that between a
mother's husband and the wife's child. Nevertheless, the father is by
far the nearest and most affectionate friend of his children. In ever
so many cases, I could observe that when a child, a young boy or girl,
was in trouble or sick; when there was a question of some one exposing
himself to difficulties or danger for the child's sake, it was always
the father who worried, who would undergo all the hardships needed,
and never the maternal uncle. This state of things is quite clearly
recognised, and explicitly put into words by the natives. In matters
of inheritance and handing over of possessions, a man always shows
the tendency to do as much for his children as he is able, considering
his obligations to his sister's family.

It is difficult, in one phrase or two, to epitomise the distinction
between the two relations, that between a boy and his maternal uncle,
and that between a son and a father. The best way to put it shortly
might be by saying that the maternal uncle's position of close relation
is regarded as right by law and usage, whereas the father's interest
and affection for his children are due to sentiment, and to the
intimate personal relations existing between them. He has watched
the children grow up, he has assisted the mother in many of the
small and tender cares given to an infant, he has carried the child
about, and given it such education as it gets from watching the elder
ones at work, and gradually joining in. In matters of inheritance,
the father gives the children all that he can, and gives it freely
and with pleasure; the maternal uncle gives under the compulsion of
custom what he cannot withhold and keep for his own children.




VII

A few more words must be said about some of the magico-religious ideas
of the Trobrianders. The main thing that struck me in connection with
their belief in the spirits of the dead, was that they are almost
completely devoid of any fear of ghosts, of any of these uncanny
feelings with which we face the idea of a possible return of the
dead. All the fears and dreads of the natives are reserved for black
magic, flying witches, malevolent disease-bringing beings, but above
all for sorcerers and witches. The spirits migrate immediately after
death to the island of Tuma, lying in the North-West of Boyowa, and
there they exist for another span of time, underground, say some, on
the surface of the earth, though invisible, say others. They return
to visit their own villages once a year, and take part in the big
annual feast, milamala, where they receive offerings. Sometimes, at
this season, they show themselves to the living, who are, however, not
alarmed by it, and in general the spirits do not influence human beings
very much, for better or worse. [32] In a number of magical formulæ,
there is an invocation of ancestral spirits, and they receive offerings
in several rites. But there is nothing of the mutual interaction,
of the intimate collaboration between man and spirit which are the
essence of religious cult.

On the other hand, magic, the attempt of man to govern the forces of
nature directly, by means of a special lore, is all-pervading, and
all-important in the Trobriands. [33] Sorcery and garden magic have
already been mentioned. Here it must suffice to add, that everything
that vitally affects the native is accompanied by magic. All economic
activities have their magic; love, welfare of babies, talents and
crafts, beauty and agility--all can be fostered or frustrated by
magic. In dealing with the Kula--a pursuit of immense importance
to the natives, and playing on almost all their social passions and
ambitions--we shall meet with another system of magic, and we shall
have then to go more into detail about the subject in general.

Disease, health, or death are also the result of magic or
counter-magic. The Trobrianders have a very complex and very definite
set of theoretical views on these matters. Good health is primarily
of course the natural, normal state. Minor ills may be contracted
by exposure, over-eating, over-strain, bad food, or other ordinary
causes. Such ailments never last, and have never any really bad
effects, nor are they of immediate danger. But, if a man sickens for
any length of time, and his strength seems to be really sapped, then
the evil forces are at work. By far the most prevalent form of black
magic, is that of the bwaga'u, that is the black sorcerer, of whom
there are a number in each district. Usually even in each village
there are one or two men more or less dreaded as bwaga'u. To be one
does not require any special initiation except the knowledge of the
spells. To learn these--that is, to learn them in such a manner as
to become an acknowledged bwaga'u--can only be done by means of high
payment, or in exceptional circumstances. Thus, a father will often
"give" his sorcery to his son, always, however, without payment; or
a commoner will teach it to a man of rank, or a man to his sister's
son. In these two latter cases a very high payment would have to be
given. It is important as a characteristic of the kinship conditions
of this people, that a man receives sorcery gratis from his father,
who according to the traditional kinship system is no blood-relation,
whereas he has to pay for it to his maternal uncle, whose natural
heir he is.

When a man has acquired the black art, he applies it to a first victim,
and this has always to be some one of his own family. It is a firm
and definite belief among all the natives that if a man's sorcery has
to be any good, it must first be practised on his mother or sister,
or any of his maternal kindred. Such a matricidal act makes him a
genuine bwaga'u. His art then can be practised on others, and becomes
an established source of income.

The beliefs about sorcery are complex; they differ according as to
whether taken from a real sorcerer, or from an outsider; and there
are also evidently strata of belief, due perhaps to local variation,
perhaps to superimposed versions. Here a short summary must suffice.

When a sorcerer wants to attack someone, the first step is to cast
a light spell over his habitual haunts, a spell which will affect
him with a slight illness and compel him to keep to his bed in his
house, where he will try to cure himself by lying over a small fire
and warming his body. His first ailment, called kaynagola, comprises
pains in the body, such as (speaking from our point of view) would be
brought about by rheumatism, general cold, influenza, or any incipient
disease. When the victim is in bed, with a fire burning under him, and
also, as a rule, one in the middle of the hut, the bwaga'u stealthily
approaches the house. He is accompanied by a few nightbirds, owls
and night-jars, which keep guard over him, and he is surrounded by
a halo of legendary terrors which make all natives shiver at the
idea of meeting a sorcerer on such a nocturnal visit. He then tries
to insert through the thatch wall a bunch of herbs impregnated with
some deadly charm and tied to a long stick, and these he attempts to
thrust into the fire over which the sick man is lying. If he succeeds,
the fumes of the burnt leaves will be inhaled by the victim, whose
name has been uttered in the charm, and he will be seized by one or
other of the deadly diseases of which the natives have a long list,
with a definite symptomatology, as well as a magical etiology. Thus
the preliminary sorcery was necessary, in order to keep the victim
to his house, in which spot only can the mortal magic be performed.

Of course, the sick man is on the defensive as well. First of all,
his friends and relatives--this is one of the main duties of the wife's
brothers--will keep a close watch over him, sitting with spears round
the hut, and at all approaches to it. Often have I come across such
vigils, when walking late at night through some village. Then, the
services of some rival bwaga'u are invoked (for the art of killing
and curing is always in the same hand), and he utters counter-spells,
so that at times the efforts of the first sorcerer, even should he
succeed in burning the herbs according to the dreaded toginivayu rite,
are fruitless.

Should this be so, he resorts to the final and most fatal rite, that
of the pointing-bone. Uttering powerful spells, the bwaga'u and one or
two accomplices, boil some coco-nut oil in a small pot, far away in a
dense patch of jungle. Leaves of herbs are soaked in the oil, and then
wrapped round a sharp stingaree spine, or some similar pointed object,
and the final incantation, most deadly of all, is chanted over it. Then
the bwaga'u steals towards the village, catches sight of his victim,
and hiding himself behind a shrub or house, points the magical dagger
at him. In fact, he violently and viciously turns it round in the
air, as if to stab the victim, and to twist and wrench the point in
the wound. This, if carried out properly, and not counteracted by a
still more powerful magician, will never fail to kill a man.

I have here summarised the bare outlines of the successive application
of black magic as it is believed by sorcerer and outsider alike to
be done, and to act in producing disease and death. There can be no
doubt that the acts of sorcery are really carried out by those who
believe themselves to possess the black powers. It is equally certain
that the nervous strain of knowing one's life to be threatened by
a bwaga'u is very great, and probably it is much worse when a man
knows that behind the sorcerer stands the might of the chief, and this
apprehension certainly contributes powerfully towards the success of
black magic. On the other hand, a chief, if attacked, would have a
good guard to protect him, and the most powerful wizards to back him
up, and also the authority to deal directly with anyone suspected
of plotting against him. Thus sorcery, which is one of the means of
carrying on the established order, is in its turn strengthened by it.

If we remember that, as in all belief in the miraculous and
supernatural, so also here, there is the loophole of counterforces,
and of the sorcery being incorrectly or inefficiently applied, spoilt
by broken taboos, mispronounced spells, or what not; again, that
suggestion strongly influences the victim, and undermines his natural
resistance; further that all disease is invariably traced back to
some sorcerer or other, who, whether it is true or not, often frankly
admits his responsibility in order to enhance his reputation, there
is then no difficulty in understanding why the belief in black magic
flourishes, why no empirical evidence can ever dispel it, and why the
sorcerer no less than the victim, has confidence in his own powers. At
least, the difficulty is the same as in explaining many contemporary
examples of results achieved by miracles and faith healing, such as
Christian Science or Lourdes, or in any cure by prayers and devotion.

Although by far the most important of them all, the bwaga'u is only one
among the beings who can cause disease and death. The often-mentioned
flying-witches, who come always from the Southern half of the island,
or from the East, from the islands of Kitava, Iwa, Gava, or Murua, are
even more deadly. All very rapid and violent diseases, more especially
such as show no direct, perceptible symptoms, are attributed to the
mulukwausi, as they are called. Invisible, they fly through the air,
and perch on trees, house-tops, and other high places. From there,
they pounce upon a man or woman and remove and hide "the inside,"
that is, the lungs, heart and guts, or the brains and tongue. Such a
victim will die within a day or two, unless another witch, called for
the purpose and well paid, goes in search and restores the missing
"inside." Of course, sometimes it is too late to do it, as the meal
has been eaten in the meantime! Then the victim must die.

Another powerful agency of death consists of the tauva'u, non-human
though anthropomorphic beings, who cause all epidemic disease. When,
at the end of the rainy season the new and unripe yams have come in,
and dysentery rages, decimating the villages; or, when in hot and
damp years an infectious disease passes over the district, taking
heavy toll, this means that the tauva'u have come from the South, and
that, invisible, they march through the villages, rattling their lime
gourds, and with their sword-clubs or sticks hitting their victims, who
immediately sicken and die. The tauva'u can, at will, assume the shape
of man or reptile. He appears then as a snake, or crab, or lizard,
and you recognise him at once, for he will not run away from you,
and he has as a rule a patch of some gaudy colour on his skin. It
would be a fatal thing to kill such a reptile. On the contrary, it
has to be taken up cautiously and treated as a chief; that is to say,
it is placed on a high platform, and some of the valuable tokens of
wealth--a polished green stone blade, or a pair of arm-shells, or a
necklace of spondylus shell beads must be put before it as an offering.

It is very interesting to note that the tauva'u are believed to come
from the Northern coast of Normanby Island, from the district of
Du'a'u, and more especially from a place called Sewatupa. This is the
very place where, according to Dobuan belief and myth, their sorcery
originated. Thus, what to the local tribes of the originating place
is ordinary sorcery, practised by men, becomes, when looked at from a
great distance, and from an alien tribe, a non-human agency, endowed
with such super-normal powers as changing of shape, invisibility,
and a direct, infallible method of inflicting death.

The tauva'u have sometimes sexual intercourse with women; several
present cases are on record, and such women who have a familiar tauva'u
become dangerous witches, though how they practise their witchcraft
is not quite clear to the natives.

A much less dangerous being is the tokway, a wood-sprite, living in
trees and rocks, stealing crops from the field and from the yam-houses,
and inflicting slight ailments. Some men in the past have acquired
the knowledge of how to do this from the tokway, and have handed it
on to their descendants.

So we see that, except for the very light ailments which pass quickly
and easily, all disease is attributed to sorcery. Even accidents are
not believed to happen without cause. That this is the case also with
drowning, we shall learn more in detail, when we have to follow the
Trobrianders in their dangerous sea-trips. Natural death, caused by
old age, is admittedly possible, but when I asked in several concrete
cases, in which age was obviously the cause, why such and such a man
died, I was always told that a bwaga'u was at the back of it. Only
suicide and death in battle have a different place in the mind of the
natives, and this is also confirmed by the belief that people killed
in war, those that commit suicide, and those who are bewitched to
death have, each class, their own way to the other world.

This sketch of Trobriand tribal life, belief and customs must suffice,
and we shall still have opportunities of enlarging upon these subjects
that most matter to us for the present study.




VIII

Two more districts remain to be mentioned, through which the Kula
trade passes on its circuit, before it returns to the place from
where we started. One of them is the Eastern portion of the Northern
Massim, comprising the Marshall Bennett Islands (Kitava, Iwa, Gawa,
Kwayawata), and Woodlark Island (Murua), with the small group of Nada
Islands. The other district is that of St. Aignan Island, called by
the natives Masima, or Misima, with the smaller island Panayati.

Looking from the rocky shores of Boyowa, at its narrowest point, we
can see over the white breakers on the fringing reef and over the sea,
here always blue and limpid, the silhouette of a flat-topped, low rock,
almost due East. This is Kitava. To the Trobrianders of the Eastern
districts, this island and those behind it are the promised land
of the Kula, just as Dobu is to the natives of Southern Boyowa. But
here, unlike in the South, they have to deal with tribesmen who speak
their own language, with dialectic differences only, and who have very
much the same institutions and customs. In fact, the nearest island,
Kitava, differs only very little from the Trobriands. Although the
more distant islands, especially Murua, have a slightly different
form of totemism, with hardly any idea of rank attached to the
sub-clans, and consequently no chieftainship in the Trobriand
sense, yet their social organisation is also much the same as in the
Western province. [34] I know the natives only from having seen them
very frequently and in great numbers in the Trobriands, where they
come on Kula expeditions. In Murua, however, I spent a short time
doing field-work in the village of Dikoyas. In appearance, dress,
ornaments and manners, the natives are indistinguishable from the
Trobrianders. Their ideas and customs in matters of sex, marriage,
and kinship are, with variations in detail only, the same as in
Boyowa. In beliefs and mythology, they also belong to the same culture.

To the Trobrianders, the Eastern islands are also the chief home and
stronghold of the dreaded mulukwausi (flying witches); the land whence
love magic came, originating in the island of Iwa; the distant shores
towards which the mythical hero Tudava sailed, performing many feats,
till he finally disappeared, no one knows where. The most recent
version is that he most likely finished his career in the white man's
country. To the Eastern islands, says native belief, the spirits of
the dead, killed by sorcery, go round on a short visit not stopping
there, only floating through the air like clouds, before they turn
round to the North-West to Tuma.


From these islands, many important products come to Boyowa (the
Trobriands), but none half as important as the tough, homogeneous
green-stone, from which all their implements were made in the past,
and of which the ceremonial axes are made up till now. Some of these
places are renowned for their yam gardens, especially Kitava, and it is
recognised that the best carving in black ebony comes from there. The
most important point of difference between the natives of this district
and the Trobrianders, lies in the method of mortuary distributions,
to which subject we shall have to return in a later part of the book,
as it is closely connected with Kula.

From Murua (Woodlark Island) the Kula track curves over to the South
in two different branches, one direct to Tubetube, and the other to
Misima, and thence to Tubetube and Wari. The district of Misima is
almost entirely unknown to me--I have only spoken once or twice with
natives of this island, and there is not, to my knowledge, any reliable
published information about that district, so we shall have to pass
it over with a very few words. This is, however, not so alarming,
because it is certain, even from the little I know about them, that
the natives do not essentially differ from the other Massim. They
are totemic and matrilineal; there is no chieftainship, and the form
of authority is the same as in the Southern Massim. Their sorcerers
and witches resemble those of the Southern Massim and Dobuans. In
industries, they specialise in canoe-building, and in the small
island of Panayati produce the same type of craft as the natives of
Gawa and Woodlark Island, slightly different only from the Trobriand
canoe. In the island of Misima, a very big supply of areca (betel)
nut is produced, as there is a custom of planting a number of these
nuts after a man's death.

The small islands of Tubetube and Wari, which form the final link of
the Kula, lie already within the district of the Southern Massim. In
fact, the island of Tubetube is one of the places studied in detail
by Professor Seligman, and its ethnographical description is one of
three parallel monographs which form the division of the Southern
Massim in the treatise so often quoted.

Finally, I want to point out again that the descriptions of the
various Kula districts given in this and in the previous chapter,
though accurate in every detail, are not meant to be an exhaustive
ethnographic sketch of the tribes. They have been given with a few
light touches in order to produce a vivid and so-to-speak personal
impression of the various type of natives, and countries and of
cultures. If I have succeeded in giving a physiognomy to each of the
various tribes, to the Trobrianders, to the Amphlettans, the Dobuans,
and the Southern Massim, and in arousing some interest in them,
the main purpose has been achieved, and the necessary ethnographic
background for the Kula has been supplied.









CHAPTER III

THE ESSENTIALS OF THE KULA


I

Having thus described the scene, and the actors, let us now proceed
to the performance. The Kula is a form of exchange, of extensive,
inter-tribal character; it is carried on by communities inhabiting a
wide ring of islands, which form a closed circuit. This circuit can be
seen on Map V, where it is represented by the lines joining a number
of islands to the North and East of the East end of New Guinea. Along
this route, articles of two kinds, and these two kinds only, are
constantly travelling in opposite directions. In the direction of the
hands of a clock, moves constantly one of these kinds--long necklaces
of red shell, called soulava (Plates XVIII and XIX). In the opposite
direction moves the other kind--bracelets of white shell called mwali
(Plates XVI and XVII). Each of these articles, as it travels in its
own direction on the closed circuit, meets on its way articles of
the other class, and is constantly being exchanged for them. Every
movement of the Kula articles, every detail of the transactions is
fixed and regulated by a set of traditional rules and conventions,
and some acts of the Kula are accompanied by an elaborate magical
ritual and public ceremonies.

On every island and in every village, a more or less limited number of
men take part in the Kula--that is to say, receive the goods, hold them
for a short time, and then pass them on. Therefore every man who is in
the Kula, periodically though not regularly, receives one or several
mwali (arm-shells), or a soulava (necklace of red shell discs), and
then has to hand it on to one of his partners, from whom he receives
the opposite commodity in exchange. Thus no man ever keeps any of the
articles for any length of time in his possession. One transaction
does not finish the Kula relationship, the rule being "once in the
Kula, always in the Kula," and a partnership between two men is a
permanent and lifelong affair. Again, any given mwali or soulava
may always be found travelling and changing hands, and there is no
question of its ever settling down, so that the principle "once in
the Kula, always in the Kula" applies also to the valuables themselves.

The ceremonial exchange of the two articles is the main, the
fundamental aspect of the Kula. But associated with it, and done
under its cover, we find a great number of secondary activities
and features. Thus, side by side with the ritual exchange of
arm-shells and necklaces, the natives carry on ordinary trade,
bartering from one island to another a great number of utilities,
often unprocurable in the district to which they are imported, and
indispensable there. Further, there are other activities, preliminary
to the Kula, or associated with it, such as the building of sea-going
canoes for the expeditions, certain big forms of mortuary ceremonies,
and preparatory taboos.

The Kula is thus an extremely big and complex institution, both in
its geographical extent, and in the manifoldness of its component
pursuits. It welds together a considerable number of tribes, and it
embraces a vast complex of activities, interconnected, and playing
into one another, so as to form one organic whole.

Yet it must be remembered that what appears to us an extensive,
complicated, and yet well ordered institution is the outcome of ever
so many doings and pursuits, carried on by savages, who have no laws
or aims or charters definitely laid down. They have no knowledge of
the total outline of any of their social structure. They know their
own motives, know the purpose of individual actions and the rules
which apply to them, but how, out of these, the whole collective
institution shapes, this is beyond their mental range. Not even
the most intelligent native has any clear idea of the Kula as a big,
organised social construction, still less of its sociological function
and implications. If you were to ask him what the Kula is, he would
answer by giving a few details, most likely by giving his personal
experiences and subjective views on the Kula, but nothing approaching
the definition just given here. Not even a partial coherent account
could be obtained. For the integral picture does not exist in his mind;
he is in it, and cannot see the whole from the outside.

The integration of all the details observed, the achievement of a
sociological synthesis of all the various, relevant symptoms, is the
task of the Ethnographer. First of all, he has to find out that certain
activities, which at first sight might appear incoherent and not
correlated, have a meaning. He then has to find out what is constant
and relevant in these activities, and what accidental and inessential,
that is, to find out the laws and rules of all the transactions. Again,
the Ethnographer has to construct the picture of the big institution,
very much as the physicist constructs his theory from the experimental
data, which always have been within reach of everybody, but which
needed a consistent interpretation. I have touched on this point of
method in the Introduction (Divisions V and VI), but I have repeated it
here, as it is necessary to grasp it clearly in order not to lose the
right perspective of conditions as they really exist among the natives.




II

In giving the above abstract and concise definition, I had to reverse
the order of research, as this is done in ethnographic field-work,
where the most generalised inferences are obtained as the result
of long inquiries and laborious inductions. The general definition
of the Kula will serve as a sort of plan or diagram in our further
concrete and detailed descriptions. And this is the more necessary
as the Kula is concerned with the exchange of wealth and utilities,
and therefore it is an economic institution, and there is no other
aspect of primitive life where our knowledge is more scanty and our
understanding more superficial than in Economics. Hence misconception
is rampant, and it is necessary to clear the ground when approaching
any economic subject.

Thus in the Introduction we called the Kula a "form of trade," and we
ranged it alongside other systems of barter. This is quite correct,
if we give the word "trade" a sufficiently wide interpretation, and
mean by it any exchange of goods. But the word "trade" is used in
current Ethnography and economic literature with so many different
implications that a whole lot of misleading, preconceived ideas have
to be brushed aside in order to grasp the facts correctly. Thus the
aprioric current notion of primitive trade would be that of an exchange
of indispensable or useful articles, done without much ceremony or
regulation, under stress of dearth or need, in spasmodic, irregular
intervals--and this done either by direct barter, everyone looking
out sharply not to be done out of his due, or, if the savages were
too timid and distrustful to face one another, by some customary
arrangement, securing by means of heavy penalties compliance in
the obligations incurred or imposed. [35] Waiving for the present
the question how far this conception is valid or not in general--in
my opinion it is quite misleading--we have to realise clearly that
the Kula contradicts in almost every point the above definition of
"savage trade." It shows to us primitive exchange in an entirely
different light.

The Kula is not a surreptitious and precarious form of exchange. It is,
quite on the contrary, rooted in myth, backed by traditional law, and
surrounded with magical rites. All its main transactions are public
and ceremonial, and carried out according to definite rules. It is
not done on the spur of the moment, but happens periodically, at
dates settled in advance, and it is carried on along definite trade
routes, which must lead to fixed trysting places. Sociologically,
though transacted between tribes differing in language, culture,
and probably even in race, it is based on a fixed and permanent
status, on a partnership which binds into couples some thousands of
individuals. This partnership is a lifelong relationship, it implies
various mutual duties and privileges, and constitutes a type of
inter-tribal relationship on an enormous scale. As to the economic
mechanism of the transactions, this is based on a specific form of
credit, which implies a high degree of mutual trust and commercial
honour--and this refers also to the subsidiary, minor trade, which
accompanies the Kula proper. Finally, the Kula is not done under
stress of any need, since its main aim is to exchange articles which
are of no practical use.

From the concise definition of Kula given at the beginning of this
chapter, we see that in its final essence, divested of all trappings
and accessories, it is a very simple affair, which at first sight
might even appear tame and unromantic. After all, it only consists
of an exchange, interminably repeated, of two articles intended for
ornamentation, but not even used for that to any extent. Yet this
simple action--this passing from hand to hand of two meaningless
and quite useless objects--has somehow succeeded in becoming the
foundation of a big inter-tribal institution, in being associated with
ever so many other activities. Myth, magic and tradition have built
up around it definite ritual and ceremonial forms, have given it a
halo of romance and value in the minds of the natives, have indeed
created a passion in their hearts for this simple exchange.

The definition of the Kula must now be amplified, and we must describe
one after the other its fundamental characteristics and main rules,
so that it may be clearly grasped by what mechanism the mere exchange
of two articles results in an institution so vast, complex, and
deeply rooted.




III

First of all, a few words must be said about the two principal
objects of exchange, the arm-shells (mwali) and the necklaces
(soulava). The arm-shells are obtained by breaking off the top and
the narrow end of a big, cone-shaped shell (Conus millepunctatus),
and then polishing up the remaining ring. These bracelets are highly
coveted by all the Papuo-Melanesians of New Guinea, and they spread
even into the pure Papuan district of the Gulf. [36] The manner of
wearing the arm-shells is illustrated by Plate XVII, where the men
have put them on on purpose to be photographed.

The use of the small discs of red spondylus shell, out of which
the soulava are made, is also of a very wide diffusion. There is a
manufacturing centre of them in one of the villages in Port Moresby,
and also in several places in Eastern New Guinea, notably in Rossell
Island, and in the Trobriands. I have said "use" on purpose here,
because these small beads, each of them a flat, round disc with a hole
in the centre, coloured anything from muddy brown to carmine red, are
employed in various ways for ornamentation. They are most generally
used as part of earrings, made of rings of turtle shell, which are
attached to the ear lobe, and from which hang a cluster of the shell
discs. These earrings are very much worn, and, especially among the
Massim, you see them on the ears of every second man or woman, while
others are satisfied with turtle shell alone, unornamented with the
shell discs. Another everyday ornament, frequently met with and worn,
especially by young girls and boys, consists of a short necklace,
just encircling the neck, made of the red spondylus discs, with one
or more cowrie shell pendants. These shell discs can be, and often
are, used in the make-up of the various classes of the more elaborate
ornaments, worn on festive occasions only. Here, however, we are more
especially concerned with the very long necklaces, measuring from two
to five metres, made of spondylus discs, of which there are two main
varieties, one, much the finer, with a big shell pendant, the other
made of bigger discs, and with a few cowrie shells or black banana
seeds in the centre (see Plate XVIII).

The arm-shells on the one hand, and the long spondylus shell strings
on the other, the two main Kula articles, are primarily ornaments. As
such, they are used with the most elaborate dancing dress only,
and on very festive occasions such as big ceremonial dances, great
feasts, and big gatherings, where several villages are represented,
as can be seen in Plate VI. Never could they be used as everyday
ornaments, nor on occasions of minor importance, such as a small
dance in the village, a harvest gathering, a love-making expedition,
when facial painting, floral decoration and smaller though not quite
everyday ornaments are worn (see Plates XII and XIII). But even
though usable and sometimes used, this is not the main function of
these articles. Thus, a chief may have several shell strings in his
possession, and a few arm-shells. Supposing that a big dance is held
in his or in a neighbouring village, he will not put on his ornaments
himself if he goes to assist at it, unless he intends to dance
and decorate himself, but any of his relatives, his children or his
friends and even vassals, can have the use of them for the asking. If
you go to a feast or a dance where there are a number of men wearing
such ornaments, and ask anyone of them at random to whom it belongs,
the chances are that more than half of them will answer that they
themselves are not the owners, but that they had the articles lent to
them. These objects are not owned in order to be used; the privilege
of decorating oneself with them is not the real aim of possession.

Indeed--and this is more significant--by far the greater number of the
arm-shells, easily ninety per cent., are of too small a size to be worn
even by young boys and girls. A few are so big and valuable that they
would not be worn at all, except once in a decade by a very important
man on a very festive day. Though all the shell-strings can be worn,
some of them are again considered too valuable, and are cumbersome
for frequent use, and would be worn on very exceptional occasions only.

This negative description leaves us with the questions: why, then,
are these objects valued, what purpose do they serve? The full answer
to this question will emerge out of the whole story contained in the
following chapters, but an approximate idea must be given at once. As
it is always better to approach the unknown through the known, let us
consider for a moment whether among ourselves we have not some type of
objects which play a similar rôle and which are used and possessed in
the same manner. When, after a six years' absence in the South Seas and
Australia, I returned to Europe and did my first bit of sight-seeing
in Edinburgh Castle, I was shown the Crown jewels. The keeper told
many stories of how they were worn by this or that king or queen
on such and such occasion, of how some of them had been taken over
to London, to the great and just indignation of the whole Scottish
nation, how they were restored, and how now everyone can be pleased,
since they are safe under lock and key, and no one can touch them. As
I was looking at them and thinking how ugly, useless, ungainly, even
tawdry they were, I had the feeling that something similar had been
told to me of late, and that I had seen many other objects of this
sort, which made a similar impression on me.

And then arose before me the vision of a native village on coral soil,
and a small, rickety platform temporarily erected under a pandanus
thatch, surrounded by a number of brown, naked men, and one of them
showing me long, thin red strings, and big, white, worn-out objects,
clumsy to sight and greasy to touch. With reverence he also would name
them, and tell their history, and by whom and when they were worn,
and how they changed hands, and how their temporary possession was a
great sign of the importance and glory of the village. The analogy
between the European and the Trobriand vaygu'a (valuables) must be
delimited with more precision. The Crown jewels, in fact, any heirlooms
too valuable and too cumbersome to be worn, represent the same type as
vaygu'a in that they are merely possessed for the sake of possession
itself, and the ownership of them with the ensuing renown is the main
source of their value. Also both heirlooms and vaygu'a are cherished
because of the historical sentiment which surrounds them. However ugly,
useless, and--according to current standards--valueless an object
may be, if it has figured in historical scenes and passed through
the hands of historic persons, and is therefore an unfailing vehicle
of important sentimental associations, it cannot but be precious to
us. This historic sentimentalism, which indeed has a large share in
our general interest in studies of past events, exists also in the
South Seas. Every really good Kula article has its individual name,
round each there is a sort of history and romance in the traditions
of the natives. Crown jewels or heirlooms are insignia of rank and
symbols of wealth respectively, and in olden days with us, and in New
Guinea up till a few years ago, both rank and wealth went together. The
main point of difference is that the Kula goods are only in possession
for a time, whereas the European treasure must be permanently owned
in order to have full value.

Taking a broader, ethnological view of the question, we may class
the Kula valuables among the many "ceremonial" objects of wealth;
enormous, carved and decorated weapons, stone implements, articles of
domestic and industrial nature, too well decorated and too clumsy for
use. Such things are usually called "ceremonial," but this word seems
to cover a great number of meanings and much that has no meaning at
all. In fact, very often, especially on museum labels, an article is
called "ceremonial" simply because nothing is known about its uses and
general nature. Speaking only about museum exhibits from New Guinea,
I can say that many so-called ceremonial objects are nothing but
simply overgrown objects of use, which preciousness of material and
amount of labour expended have transformed into reservoirs of condensed
economic value. Again, others are used on festive occasions, but play
no part whatever in rites and ceremonies, and serve for decoration
only, and these might be called objects of parade (comp. Chap. VI,
Div. I). Finally, a number of these articles function actually as
instruments of a magical or religious rite, and belong to the intrinsic
apparatus of a ceremony. Such and such only could be correctly called
ceremonial. During the So'i feasts among the Southern Massim, women
carrying polished axe blades in fine carved handles, accompany with a
rhythmic step to the beat of drums, the entry of the pigs and mango
saplings into the village (see Plates V and VI). As this is part
of the ceremony and the axes are an indispensable accessory, their
use in this case can be legitimately called "ceremonial." Again,
in certain magical ceremonies in the Trobriands, the towosi (garden
magician) has to carry a mounted axe blade on his shoulders, and with
it he delivers a ritual blow at a kamkokola structure (see Plate LIX;
compare Chapter II, Division IV).

The vaygu'a--the Kula valuables--in one of their aspects are overgrown
objects of use. They are also, however, ceremonial objects in the
narrow and correct sense of the word. This will become clear after
perusal of the following pages, and to this point we shall return in
the last chapter.

It must be kept in mind that here we are trying to obtain a clear and
vivid idea of what the Kula valuables are to the natives, and not to
give a detailed and circumstantial description of them, nor to define
them with precision. The comparison with the European heirlooms or
Crown jewels was given in order to show that this type of ownership
is not entirely a fantastic South Sea custom, untranslatable into our
ideas. For--and this is a point I want to stress--the comparison I
have made is not based on purely external, superficial similarity. The
psychological and sociological forces at work are the same, it is
really the same mental attitude which makes us value our heirlooms,
and makes the natives in New Guinea value their vaygu'a.




IV

The exchange of these two classes of vaygu'a, of the armshells and the
necklaces, constitutes the main act of the Kula. This exchange is not
done freely, right and left, as opportunity offers, and where the whim
leads. It is subject indeed to strict limitations and regulations. One
of these refers to the sociology of the exchange, and entails that
Kula transactions can be done only between partners. A man who is in
the Kula--for not everyone within its district is entitled to carry
it on--has only a limited number of people with whom he does it. This
partnership is entered upon in a definite manner, under fulfilment of
certain formalities, and it constitutes a life-long relationship. The
number of partners a man has varies with his rank and importance. A
commoner in the Trobriands would have a few partners only, whereas
a chief would number hundreds of them. There is no special social
mechanism to limit the partnership of some people and extend that of
the others, but a man would naturally know to what number of partners
he was entitled by his rank and position. And there would be always the
example of his immediate ancestors to guide him. In other tribes, where
the distinction of rank is not so pronounced, an old man of standing,
or a headman of a hamlet or village would also have hundreds of Kula
associates, whereas a man of minor importance would have but few.

Two Kula partners have to kula with one another, and exchange other
gifts incidentally; they behave as friends, and have a number of
mutual duties and obligations, which vary with the distance between
their villages and with their reciprocal status. An average man has a
few partners near by, as a rule his relations-in-law or his friends,
and with these partners, he is generally on very friendly terms. The
Kula partnership is one of the special bonds which unite two men
into one of the standing relations of mutual exchange of gifts and
services so characteristic of these natives. Again, the average man
will have one or two chiefs in his or in the neighbouring districts
with whom he kulas. In such a case, he would be bound to assist and
serve them in various ways, and to offer them the pick of his vaygu'a
when he gets a fresh supply. On the other hand he would expect them
to be specially liberal to him.

The overseas partner is, on the other hand, a host, patron and ally
in a land of danger and insecurity. Nowadays, though the feeling of
danger still persists, and natives never feel safe and comfortable
in a strange district, this danger is rather felt as a magical one,
and it is more the fear of foreign sorcery that besets them. In
olden days, more tangible dangers were apprehended, and the partner
was the main guarantee of safety. He also provides with food, gives
presents, and his house, though never used to sleep in, is the place
in which to foregather while in the village. Thus the Kula partnership
provides every man within its ring with a few friends near at hand,
and with some friendly allies in the far-away, dangerous, foreign
districts. These are the only people with whom he can kula, but,
of course, amongst all his partners, he is free to choose to which
one he will offer which object.

Let us now try to cast a broad glance at the cumulative effects
of the rules of partnership. We see that all around the ring of
Kula there is a network of relationships, and that naturally the
whole forms one interwoven fabric. Men living at hundreds of miles'
sailing distance from one another are bound together by direct or
intermediate partnership, exchange with each other, know of each
other, and on certain occasions meet in a large intertribal gathering
(Plate XX). Objects given by one, in time reach some very distant
indirect partner or other, and not only Kula objects, but various
articles of domestic use and minor gifts. It is easy to see that in
the long run, not only objects of material culture, but also customs,
songs, art motives and general cultural influences travel along the
Kula route. It is a vast, inter-tribal net of relationships, a big
institution, consisting of thousands of men, all bound together by
one common passion for Kula exchange, and secondarily, by many minor
ties and interests.

Returning again to the personal aspect of the Kula, let us take a
concrete example, that of an average man who lives, let us assume,
in the village of Sinaketa, an important Kula centre in the Southern
Trobriands. He has a few partners, near and far, but they again fall
into categories, those who give him arm-shells, and those who give
him necklaces. For it is naturally an invariable rule of the Kula that
arm-shells and necklaces are never received from the same man, since
they must travel in different directions. If one partner gives the
armshells, and I return to him a necklace, all future operations have
to be of the same type. More than that, the nature of the operation
between me, the man of Sinaketa, and my partner, is determined by our
relative positions with regard to the points of the compass. Thus I,
in Sinaketa, would receive from the North and East only arm-shells;
from the South and West, necklaces are given to me. If I have a near
partner next door to me, if his abode is North or East of mine,
he will always be giving me arm-shells and receiving necklaces
from me. If, at a later time he were to shift his residence within
the village, the old relationship would obtain, but if he became
a member of another village community on the other side of me the
relationship would be reversed. The partners in villages to the North
of Sinaketa, in the district of Luba, Kulumata, or Kiriwina all supply
me with arm-shells. These I hand over to my partners in the South,
and receive from them necklaces. The South in this case means the
southern districts of Boyowa, as well as the Amphletts and Dobu.

Thus every man has to obey definite rules as to the geographical
direction of his transactions. At any point in the Kula ring, if
we imagine him turned towards the centre of the circle, he receives
the arm-shells with his left hand, and the necklaces with his right,
and then hands them both on. In other words, he constantly passes the
arm-shells from left to right, and the necklaces from right to left.

Applying this rule of personal conduct to the whole Kula ring,
we can see at once what the aggregate result is. The sum total
of exchanges will not result in an aimless shifting of the two
classes of article, in a fortuitous come and go of the armshells and
necklaces. Two continuous streams will constantly flow on, the one
of necklaces following the hands of a clock, and the other, composed
of the arm-shells, in the opposite direction. We see thus that it
is quite correct to speak of the circular exchange of the Kula, of a
ring or circuit of moving articles (comp. Map V). On this ring, all
the villages are placed in a definitely fixed position with regard
to one another, so that one is always on either the arm-shell or on
the necklace side of the other.

Now we pass to another rule of the Kula, of the greatest importance. As
just explained "the armshells and shell-strings always travel in their
own respective directions on the ring, and they are never, under
any circumstances, traded back in the wrong direction. Also, they
never stop. It seems almost incredible at first, but it is the fact,
nevertheless, that no one ever keeps any of the Kula: valuables for
any length of time. Indeed, in the whole of the Trobriands there are
perhaps only one or two specially fine armshells and shell-necklaces
permanently owned as heirlooms, and these are set apart as a special
class, and are once and for all out of the Kula. 'Ownership,'
therefore, in Kula, is quite a special economic relation. A man who
is in the Kula never keeps any article for longer than, say, a year
or two. Even this exposes him to the reproach of being niggardly, and
certain districts have the bad reputation of being 'slow' and 'hard'
in the Kula. On the other hand, each man has an enormous number of
articles passing through his hands during his life time, of which
he enjoys a temporary possession, and which he keeps in trust for a
time. This possession hardly ever makes him use the articles, and
he remains under the obligation soon again to hand them on to one
of his partners. But the temporary ownership allows him to draw a
great deal of renown, to exhibit his article, to tell how he obtained
it, and to plan to whom he is going to give it. And all this forms
one of the favourite subjects of tribal conversation and gossip,
in which the feats and the glory in Kula of chiefs or commoners are
constantly discussed and re-discussed." [37] Thus every article moves
in one direction only, never comes back, never permanently stops,
and takes as a rule some two to ten years to make the round.

This feature of the Kula is perhaps its most remarkable one, since it
creates a new type of ownership, and places the two Kula articles in a
class of their own. Here we can return to the comparison drawn between
the vaygu'a (Kiriwinian valuables) and the European heirlooms. This
comparison broke down on one point: in the European objects of this
class, permanent ownership, lasting association with the hereditary
dignity or rank or with a family, is one of its main features. In
this the Kula articles differ from heirlooms, but resemble another
type of valued object, that is, trophies, gauges of superiority,
sporting cups, objects which are kept for a time only by the winning
party, whether a group or an individual. Though held only in trust,
only for a period, though never used in any utilitarian way, yet the
holders get from them a special type of pleasure by the mere fact of
owning them, of being entitled to them. Here again, it is not only
a superficial, external resemblance, but very much the same mental
attitude, favoured by similar social arrangements. The resemblance
goes so far that in the Kula there exists also the element of pride
in merit, an element which forms the main ingredient in the pleasure
felt by a man or group holding a trophy. Success in Kula is ascribed
to special, personal power, due mainly to magic, and men are very
proud of it. Again, the whole community glories in a specially fine
Kula trophy, obtained by one of its members.

All the rules so far enumerated--looking at them from the
individual point of view--limit the social range and the direction
of the transactions as well as the duration of ownership of the
articles. Looking at them from the point of view of their integral
effect, they shape the general outline of the Kula, give it the
character of the double-closed circuit. Now a few words must be said
about the nature of each individual transaction, in so far as its
commercial technicalities are concerned. Here very definite rules
also obtain.




V

The main principle underlying the regulations of actual exchange
is that the Kula consists in the bestowing of a ceremonial gift,
which has to be repaid by an equivalent counter-gift after a lapse
of time, be it a few hours or even minutes, though sometimes as much
as a year or more may elapse between payments. [38] But it can never
be exchanged from hand to hand, with the equivalence between the two
objects discussed, bargained about and computed. The decorum of the
Kula transaction is strictly kept, and highly valued. The natives
sharply distinguish it from barter, which they practise extensively,
of which they have a clear idea, and for which they have a settled
term--in Kiriwinian: gimwali. Often, when criticising an incorrect,
too hasty, or indecorous procedure of Kula, they will say: "He conducts
his Kula as if it were gimwali."

The second very important principle is that the equivalence of the
counter-gift is left to the giver, and it cannot be enforced by any
kind of coercion. A partner who has received a Kula gift is expected
to give back fair and full value, that is, to give as good an arm-shell
as the necklace he receives, or vice versa. Again, a very fine article
must be replaced by one of equivalent value, and not by several minor
ones, though intermediate gifts may be given to mark time before the
real repayment takes place.

If the article given as counter-gift is not equivalent, the recipient
will be disappointed and angry, but he has no direct means of redress,
no means of coercing his partner, or of putting an end to the whole
transaction. What then are the forces at work which keep the partners
to the terms of the bargain? Here we come up against a very important
feature of the native's mental attitude towards wealth and value. The
great misconception of attributing to the savage a pure economic
nature, might lead us to reason incorrectly thus: "The passion of
acquiring, the loathing to lose or give away, is the fundamental and
most primitive element in man's attitude to wealth. In primitive man,
this primitive characteristic will appear in its simplest and purest
form. Grab and never let go will be the guiding principle of his
life." [39] The fundamental error in this reasoning is that it assumes
that "primitive man," as represented by the present-day savage, lives,
at least in economic matters, untrammelled by conventions and social
restrictions. Quite the reverse is the case. Although, like every
human being, the Kula native loves to possess and therefore desires
to acquire and dreads to lose, the social code of rules, with regard
to give and take by far overrides his natural acquisitive tendency.

This social code, such as we find it among the natives of the Kula is,
however, far from weakening the natural desirability of possession;
on the contrary, it lays down that to possess is to be great, and that
wealth is the indispensable appanage of social rank and attribute of
personal virtue. But the important point is that with them to possess
is to give--and here the natives differ from us notably. A man who
owns a thing is naturally expected to share it, to distribute it,
to be its trustee and dispenser. And the higher the rank the greater
the obligation. A chief will naturally be expected to give food to any
stranger, visitor, even loiterer from another end of the village. He
will be expected to share any of the betel-nut or tobacco he has
about him. So that a man of rank will have to hide away any surplus of
these articles which he wants to preserve for his further use. In the
Eastern end of New Guinea a type of large basket, with three layers,
manufactured in the Trobriands, was specially popular among people
of consequence, because one could hide away one's small treasures
in the lower compartments. Thus the main symptom of being powerful
is to be wealthy, and of wealth is to be generous. Meanness, indeed,
is the most despised vice, and the only thing about which the natives
have strong moral views, while generosity is the essence of goodness.

This moral injunction and ensuing habit of generosity, superficially
observed and misinterpreted, is responsible for another wide-spread
misconception, that of the Primitive communism of savages. This, quite
as much as the diametrically opposed figment of the acquisitive and
ruthlessly tenacious native, is definitely erroneous, and this will
be seen with sufficient clearness in the following chapters.

Thus the fundamental principle of the natives' moral code in
this matter makes a man do his fair share in Kula transaction and
the more important he is, the more will he desire to shine by his
generosity. Noblesse oblige is in reality the social norm regulating
their conduct. This does not mean that people are always satisfied,
and that there are no squabbles about the transactions, no resentments
and even feuds. It is obvious that, however much a man may want to
give a good equivalent for the object received, he may not be able to
do so. And then, as there is always a keen competition to be the most
generous giver, a man who has received less than he gave will not keep
his grievance to himself, but will brag about his own generosity and
compare it to his partner's meanness; the other resents it, and the
quarrel is ready to break out. But it is very important to realise
that there is no actual haggling, no tendency to do a man out of his
share. The giver is quite as keen as the receiver that the gift should
be generous, though for different reasons. Then, of course, there is
the important consideration that a man who is fair and generous in
the Kula will attract a larger stream to himself than a mean one.

The two main principles, namely, first that the Kula is a gift repaid
after an interval of time by a counter-gift, and not a bartering;
and second, that the equivalent rests with the giver, and cannot
be enforced, nor can there be any haggling or going back on the
exchange--these underlie all the transactions. A concrete outline of
how they are carried on, will give a sufficient preliminary idea.

"Let us suppose that I, a Sinaketa man, am in possession of a
pair of big armshells. An overseas expedition from Dobu in the
d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago, arrives at my village. Blowing a conch
shell, I take my armshell pair and I offer it to my overseas partner,
with some such words as 'This is a vaga (opening gift)--in due time,
thou returnest to me a big soulava (necklace) for it!' Next year,
when I visit my partner's village, he either is in possession of an
equivalent necklace, and this he gives to me as yotile (return gift),
or he has not a necklace good enough to repay my last gift. In this
case he will give me a small necklace--avowedly not equivalent to my
gift--and he will give it to me as basi (intermediary gift). This means
that the main gift has to be repaid on a future occasion, and the basi
is given in token of good faith--but it, in turn, must be repaid by me
in the meantime by a gift of small arm-shells. The final gift, which
will be given to me to clinch the whole transaction, would then be
called kudu (clinching gift) in contrast to basi" (loc. cit., p. 99).

Although haggling and bargaining are completely ruled out of the
Kula, there are customary and regulated ways of bidding for a piece
of vaygu'a known to be in the possession of one's partner. This is
done by the offer of what we shall call solicitary gifts, of which
there are several types. "If I, an inhabitant of Sinaketa, happen
to be in possession of a pair of arm-shells more than usually good,
the fame of it spreads, for it must be remembered that each one of
the first-class armshells and necklaces has a personal name and a
history of its own, and as they circulate around the big ring of
the Kula, they are all well known, and their appearance in a given
district always creates a sensation. Now, all my partners--whether
from overseas or from within the district--compete for the favour of
receiving this particular article of mine, and those who are specially
keen try to obtain it by giving me pokala (offerings) and kaributu
(solicitary gifts). The former (pokala) consist as a rule of pigs,
especially fine bananas, and yams or taro; the latter (kaributu)
are of greater value: the valuable, large axe-blades (called beku),
or lime spoons of whale bone are given" (loc. cit., p. 100). The
further complication in the repayment of these solicitary gifts and a
few more technicalities and technical expressions connected herewith
will be given later on in Chapter IV.




VI

I have enumerated the main rules of the Kula in a manner sufficient
for a preliminary definition, and now a few words must be said about
the associated activities and secondary aspects of the Kula. If we
realise that at times the exchange has to take place between districts
divided by dangerous seas, over which a great number of people have to
travel by sail, and do so keeping to appointed dates, it becomes clear
at once that considerable preparations are necessary to carry out the
expedition. Many preliminary activities are intimately associated with
the Kula. Such are, particularly, the building of canoes, preparation
of the outfit, the provisioning of the expedition, the fixing of dates
and social organisation of the enterprise. All these are subsidiary
to the Kula, and as they are carried on in pursuit of it, and form one
connected series, a description of the Kula must embrace an account of
these preliminary activities. The detailed account of canoe building,
of the ceremonial attached to it, of the incidental magical rites,
of the launching and trial run, of the associated customs which aim
at preparing the outfit--all this will be described in detail in the
next few chapters.

Another important pursuit inextricably bound up with the Kula,
is that of the secondary trade. Voyaging to far-off countries,
endowed with natural resources unknown in their own homes, the Kula
sailors return each time richly laden with these, the spoils of
their enterprise. Again, in order to be able to offer presents to his
partner, every outward bound canoe carries a cargo of such things as
are known to be most desirable in the overseas district. Some of this
is given away in presents to the partners, but a good deal is carried
in order to pay for the objects desired at home. In certain cases,
the visiting natives exploit on their own account during the journey
some of the natural resources overseas. For example, the Sinaketans
dive for the spondylus in Sanaroa Lagoon, and the Dobuans fish in
the Trobriands on a beach on the southern end of the island. The
secondary trade is complicated still more by the fact that such big
Kula centres as, for instance, Sinaketa, are not efficient in any
of the industries of special value to the Dobuans. Thus, Sinaketans
have to procure the necessary store of goods from the inland villages
of Kuboma, and this they do on minor trading expeditions preliminary
to the Kula. Like the canoe-building, the secondary trading will be
described in detail later on, and has only to be mentioned here.

Here, however, these subsidiary and associated activities must be
put in proper relation with regard to one another and to the main
transaction. Both the canoe-building and the ordinary trade have
been spoken of as secondary or subsidiary to the Kula proper. This
requires a comment. I do not, by thus subordinating the two things
in importance to the Kula, mean to express a philosophical reflection
or a personal opinion as to the relative value of these pursuits from
the point of view of some social teleology. Indeed, it is clear that
if we look at the acts from the outside, as comparative sociologists,
and gauge their real utility, trade and canoe-building will appear
to us as the really important achievements, whereas we shall regard
the Kula only as an indirect stimulus, impelling the natives to sail
and to trade. Here, however, I am not dealing in sociological, but
in pure ethnographical description, and any sociological analysis I
have given is only what has been absolutely indispensable to clear
away misconceptions and to define terms. [40]

By ranging the Kula as the primary and chief activity, and the rest
as secondary ones, I mean that this precedence is implied in the
institutions themselves. By studying the behaviour of the natives and
all the customs in question, we see that the Kula is in all respects
the main aim: the dates are fixed, the preliminaries settled, the
expeditions arranged, the social organisation determined, not with
regard to trade, but with regard to Kula. On an expedition, the big
ceremonial feast, held at the start, refers to the Kula; the final
ceremony of reckoning and counting the spoil refers to Kula, not to
the objects of trade obtained. Finally, the magic, which is one of the
main factors of all the procedure, refers only to the Kula, and this
applies even to a part of the magic carried out over the canoe. Some
rites in the whole cycle are done for the sake of the canoe itself,
and others for the sake of Kula. The construction of the canoes is
always carried on directly in connection with a Kula expedition. All
this, of course, will become really clear and convincing only after
the detailed account is given. But it was necessary at this point to
set the right perspective in the relation between the main Kula and
the trade.

Of course not only many of the surrounding tribes who know nothing
of the Kula do build canoes and sail far and daringly on trading
expeditions, but even within the Kula ring, in the Trobriands for
instance, there are several villages who do not kula, yet have canoes
and carry on energetic overseas trade. But where the Kula is practised,
it governs all the other allied activities, and canoe building and
trade are made subsidiary to it. And this is expressed both by the
nature of the institutions and the working of all the arrangements
on the one hand, and by the behaviour and explicit statements of the
natives on the other.

The Kula--it becomes, I hope, more and more clear--is a big,
complicated institution, insignificant though its nucleus might
appear. To the natives, it represents one of the most vital interests
in life, and as such it has a ceremonial character and is surrounded by
magic. We can well imagine that articles of wealth might pass from hand
to hand without ceremony or ritual, but in the Kula they never do. Even
when at times only small parties in one or two canoes sail overseas
and bring back vaygu'a, certain taboos are observed, and a customary
course is taken in departing, in sailing, and in arriving; even the
smallest expedition in one canoe is a tribal event of some importance,
known and spoken of over the whole district. But the characteristic
expedition is one in which a considerable number of canoes take
part, organised in a certain manner, and forming one body. Feasts,
distributions of food, and other public ceremonies are held, there
is one leader and master of the expedition, and various rules are
adhered to, in addition to the ordinary Kula taboos and observances.

The ceremonial nature of the Kula is strictly bound up with another of
its aspects--magic. "The belief in the efficiency of magic dominates
the Kula, as it does ever so many other tribal activities of the
natives. Magical rites must be performed over the sea-going canoe when
it is built, in order to make it swift, steady and safe; also magic
is done over a canoe to make it lucky in the Kula. Another system of
magical rites is done in order to avert the dangers of sailing. The
third system of magic connected with overseas expeditions is the
mwasila or the Kula magic proper. This system consists in numerous
rites and spells, all of which act directly on the mind (nanola)
of one's partner, and make him soft, unsteady in mind, and eager to
give Kula gifts" (loc. cit., p. 100).

It is clear that an institution so closely associated with magical
and ceremonial elements, as is the Kula, not only rests on a firm,
traditional foundation, but also has its large store of legends. "There
is a rich mythology of the Kula, in which stories are told about
far-off times when mythical ancestors sailed on distant and daring
expeditions. Owing totheir magical knowledge they were able to escape
dangers, to conquer their enemies, to surmount obstacles, and by their
feats they established many a precedent which is now closely followed
by tribal custom. But their importance for their descendants lies
mainly in the fact that they handed on their magic, and this made
the Kula possible for the following generations" (loc. cit., p. 100).

The Kula is also associated in certain districts, to which the
Trobriands do not belong, with the mortuary feasts, called so'i. The
association is interesting and important, and in Chapter XX an account
of it will be given.

The big Kula expeditions are carried on by a great number of natives,
a whole district together. But the geographical limits, from which the
members of an expedition are recruited, are well defined. Glancing
at Map V, "we see a number of circles, each of which represents a
certain sociological unit which we shall call a Kula community. A
Kula community consists of a village or a number of villages, who go
out together on big overseas expeditions, and who act as a body in the
Kula transactions, perform their magic in common, have common leaders,
and have the same outer and inner social sphere, within which they
exchange their valuables. The Kula consists, therefore, first of the
small, internal transactions within a Kula community or contiguous
communities, and secondly, of the big over-seas expeditions in which
the exchange of articles takes place between two communities divided
by sea. In the first, there is a chronic, permanent trickling of
articles from one village to another, and even within the village. In
the second, a whole lot of valuables, amounting to over a thousand
articles at a time, are exchanged in one enormous transaction, or, more
correctly, in ever so many transactions taking place simultaneously"
(loc. cit., p. 101). "The Kula trade consists of a series of such
periodical overseas expeditions, which link together the various
island groups, and annually bring over big quantities of vaygu'a and
of subsidiary trade from one district to another. The trade is used
and used up, but the vaygu'a--the armshells and necklets--go round
and round the ring" (loc. cit., p. 105).

In this chapter, a short, summary definition of the Kula has been
given. I enumerated one after the other its most salient features,
the most remarkable rules as they are laid down in native custom,
belief and behaviour. This was necessary in order to give a general
idea of the institution before describing its working in detail. But no
abridged definition can give to the reader the full understanding of
a human social institution. It is necessary for this, to explain its
working concretely, to bring the reader into contact with the people,
show how they proceed at each successive stage, and to describe all
the actual manifestations of the general rules laid down in abstract.

As has been said above, the Kula exchange is carried on by enterprises
of two sorts; first there are the big overseas expeditions, in which
a more or less considerable amount of valuables are carried at one
time. Then there is the inland trade in which the articles are passed
from hand to hand, often changing several owners before they move a
few miles.

The big overseas expeditions are by far the more spectacular part
of the Kula. They also contain much more public ceremonial, magical
ritual, and customary usage. They require also, of course, more of
preparation and preliminary activity. I shall therefore have a good
deal more to say about the overseas Kula expeditions than about the
internal exchange.

As the Kula customs and beliefs have been mainly studied in Boyowa,
that is, the Trobriand Islands, and from the Boyowan point of view,
I shall describe, in the first place, the typical course of an
overseas expedition, as it is prepared, organised, and carried out
from the Trobriands. Beginning with the construction of the canoes,
proceeding to the ceremonial launching and the visits of formal
presentation of canoes, we shall choose then the community of Sinaketa,
and follow the natives on one of their overseas trips, describing it
in all details. This will serve us as a type of a Kula expedition to
distant lands. It will then be indicated in what particulars such
expeditions may differ in other branches of the Kula, and for this
purpose I shall describe an expedition from Dobu, and one between
Kiriwina and Kitava. An account of inland Kula in the Trobriands,
of some associated forms of trading and of Kula in the remaining
branches will complete the account.

In the next chapter I pass, therefore, to the preliminary stages of the
Kula, in the Trobriands, beginning with a description of the canoes.









CHAPTER IV

CANOES AND SAILING


I

A canoe is an item of material culture, and as such it can
be described, photographed and even bodily transported into a
museum. But--and this is a truth too often overlooked--the ethnographic
reality of the canoe would not be brought much nearer to a student
at home, even by placing a perfect specimen right before him.

The canoe is made for a certain use, and with a definite purpose;
it is a means to an end, and we, who study native life, must not
reverse this relation, and make a fetish of the object itself. In
the study of the economic purposes for which a canoe is made, of the
various uses to which it is submitted, we find the first approach to
a deeper ethnographic treatment. Further sociological data, referring
to its ownership, accounts of who sails in it, and how it is done;
information regarding the ceremonies and customs of its construction,
a sort of typical life history of a native craft--all that brings us
nearer still to the understanding of what his canoe truly means to
the native.

Even this, however, does not touch the most vital reality of a native
canoe. For a craft, whether of bark or wood, iron or steel, lives in
the life of its sailors, and it is more to a sailor than a mere bit
of shaped matter. To the native, not less than to the white seaman, a
craft is surrounded by an atmosphere of romance, built up of tradition
and of personal experience. It is an object of cult and admiration,
a living thing, possessing its own individuality.

We Europeans--whether we know native craft by experience or through
descriptions--accustomed to our extraordinarily developed means of
water transport, are apt to look down on a native canoe and see it
in a false perspective--regarding it almost as a child's plaything,
an abortive, imperfect attempt to tackle the problem of sailing,
which we ourselves have satisfactorily solved. [41] But to the native
his cumbersome, sprawling canoe is a marvellous, almost miraculous
achievement, and a thing of beauty (see Plates XXI, XXIII, XL,
XLVII, LV). He has spun a tradition around it, and he adorns it
with his best carvings, he colours and decorates it. It is to him
a powerful contrivance for the mastery of Nature, which allows him
to cross perilous seas to distant places. It is associated with
journeys by sail, full of threatening dangers, of living hopes and
desires to which he gives expression in song and story. In short, in
the tradition of the natives, in their customs, in their behaviour,
and in their direct statements, there can be found the deep love,
the admiration, the specific attachment as to something alive and
personal, so characteristic of the sailors' attitude towards his craft.

And it is in this emotional attitude of the natives towards their
canoes that I see the deepest ethnographic reality, which must
guide us right through the study of other aspects--the customs and
technicalities of construction and of use; the economic conditions
and the associated beliefs and traditions. Ethnology or Anthropology,
the science of Man, must not shun him in his innermost self, in his
instinctive and emotional life.

A look at the pictures (for instance Plates XXI, XXIV, XXXIX, or XLVII)
will give us some idea of the general structure of the native canoes:
the body is a long, deep well, connected with an outrigger float,
which stretches parallel with the body for almost all its length
(see Plates XXI and XXIII), and with a platform going across from
one side to the other. The lightness of the material permits it to
be much more deeply immersed than any sea-going European craft, and
gives it greater buoyancy. It skims the surface, gliding up and down
the waves, now hidden by the crests, now riding on top of them. It
is a precarious but delightful sensation to sit in the slender body,
while the canoe darts on with the float raised, the platform steeply
slanting, and water constantly breaking over; or else, still better, to
perch on the platform or on the float--the latter only feasible in the
bigger canoes--and be carried across on the sea on a sort of suspended
raft, gliding over the waves in a manner almost uncanny. Occasionally
a wave leaps up and above the platform, and the canoe--unwieldy,
square raft as it seems at first--heaves lengthways and crossways,
mounting the furrows with graceful agility. When the sail is hoisted,
its heavy, stiff folds of golden matting unroll with a characteristic
swishing and crackling noise, and the canoe begins to make way; when
the water rushes away below with a hiss, and the yellow sail glows
against the intense blue of sea and sky--then indeed the romance of
sailing seems to open through a new vista.

The natural reflection on this description is that it presents the
feelings of the Ethnographer, not those of the native. Indeed there
is a great difficulty in disentangling our own sensations from a
correct reading of the innermost native mind. But if an investigator,
speaking the native's language and living among them for some time,
were to try to share and understand their feelings, he will find
that he can gauge them correctly. Soon he will learn to distinguish
when the native's behaviour is in harmony with his own, and when,
as it sometimes happens, the two are at variance.

Thus, in this case, there is no mistaking the natives' great admiration
of a good canoe; of their quickness in appreciating differences in
speed, buoyancy and stability, and of their emotional reaction to
such difference. When, on a calm day, suddenly a fresh breeze rises,
the sail is set, and fills, and the canoe lifts its lamina (outrigger
float) out of the water, and races along, flinging the spray to right
and left--there is no mistaking the keen enjoyment of the natives. All
rush to their posts and keenly watch the movements of the boat; some
break out into song, and the younger men lean over and play with the
water. They are never tired of discussing the good points of their
canoes, and analysing the various craft. In the coastal villages of
the Lagoon, boys and young men will often sail out in small canoes
on mere pleasure cruises, when they race each other, explore less
familiar nooks of the Lagoon, and in general undoubtedly enjoy the
outing, in just the same manner as we would do.

Seen from outside, after you have grasped its construction and
appreciated through personal experience its fitness for its purpose,
the canoe is no less attractive and full of character than from
within. When, on a trading expedition or as a visiting party, a fleet
of native canoes appears in the offing, with their triangular sails
like butterfly wings scattered over the water (see Plate XLVIII),
with the harmonious calls of conch shells blown in unison, the effect
is unforgettable. [42] When the canoes then approach, and you see
them rocking in the blue water in all the splendour of their fresh
white, red, and black paint, with their finely designed prow-boards,
and clanking array of large, white cowrie shells (see Plates XLIX,
LV)--you understand well the admiring love which results in all this
care bestowed by the native on the decoration of his canoe.

Even when not in actual use, when lying idle beached on the sea front
of a village, the canoe is a characteristic element in the scenery,
not without its share in the village life. The very big canoes are in
some cases housed in large sheds (see Plate XXII), which are by far
the largest buildings erected by the Trobrianders. In other villages,
where sailing is always being done, a canoe is simply covered with
palm leaves (see Plates I, LIII), as protection from the sun, and the
natives often sit on its platform, chatting, and chewing betel-nut, and
gazing at the sea. The smaller canoes, beached near the sea-front in
long parallel rows, are ready to be launched at any moment. With their
curved outline and intricate framework of poles and sticks, they form
one of the most characteristic settings of a native coastal village.




II

A few words must be said now about the technological essentials of
the canoe. Here again, a simple enumeration of the various parts
of the canoe, and a description of them, a pulling to pieces of a
lifeless object will not satisfy us. I shall instead try to show how,
given its purpose on the one hand, and the limitations in technical
means and in material on the other, the native ship-builders have
coped with the difficulties before them.

A sailing craft requires a water-tight, immersible vessel of some
considerable volume. This is supplied to our natives by a hollowed-out
log. Such a log might carry fairly heavy loads, for wood is light,
and the hollowed space adds to its buoyancy. Yet it possesses no
lateral stability, as can easily be seen. A look at the diagrammatic
section of a canoe Fig. I (1), shows that a weight with its centre of
gravity in the middle, that is, distributed symmetrically, will not
upset the equilibrium, but any load placed so as to produce a momentum
of rotation (that is, a turning force) at the sides (as indicated by
arrows at A or B) will cause the canoe to turn round and capsize.

If, however, as shown in Fig. I (2), another smaller, solid log (C)
be attached to the dug-out, a greater stability is achieved, though
not a symmetrical one. If we press down the one side of the canoe
(A) this will cause the canoe to turn round a longitudinal axis,
so that its other side (B) is raised, Fig. I (3). The log (C) will
be lifted out of the water, and its weight will produce a momentum
(turning force) proportional to the displacement, and the rest of the
canoe will come to equilibrium. This momentum is represented in the
diagram by the arrow R. Thus a great stability relative to any stress
exercised upon A, will be achieved. A stress on B causes the log to
be immersed, to which its buoyancy opposes a slight resistance. But
it can easily be seen that the stability on this side is much smaller
than on the other. This asymmetrical [43] stability plays a great
part in the technique of sailing. Thus, as we shall see, the canoe
is always so sailed that its outrigger float (C) remains in the wind
side. The pressure of the sail then lifts the canoe, so that A is
pressed into the water, and B and C are lifted, a position in which
they are extremely stable, and can stand great force of wind. Whereas
the slightest breeze would cause the canoe to turn turtle, if it fell
on the other side, and thus pressed B--C into the water.

Another look at Fig. I (2) and (3) will help us to realise that the
stability of the canoe will depend upon (i) the volume, and especially
the depth of the dug-out; (ii) the distance B--C between the dug-out
and the log; (iii) the size of the log C. The greater all these three
magnitudes are, the greater the stability of the canoes. A shallow
canoe, without much freeboard, will be easily forced into the water;
moreover, if sailed in rough weather, waves will break over it,
and fill it with water.

(i) The volume of the dug-out log naturally depends upon the length,
and thickness of the log. Fairly stable canoes are made of simply
scooped-out logs. There are limits, however, to the capacity of these,
which are very soon reached. But by building out the side, by adding
one or several planks to them, as shown in Figure I (4) the volume and
the depth can be greatly increased without much increase in weight. So
that such a canoe has a good deal of freeboard to prevent water from
breaking in. The longitudinal boards in Kiriwinian canoes are closed
in at each end by transversal prow-boards, which are also carved with
more or less perfection (see Plates XXIV c, XLVII).

(ii) The greater the distance B--C between dug-out and outrigger float,
the greater the stability of the canoe. Since the momentum of rotation
is the product of B--C (Fig. I), and the weight of the log C, it is
clear, therefore, that the greater the distance, the greater will be
the momentum. Too great a distance, however, would interfere with the
wieldiness of the canoe. Any force acting on the log would easily
tip the canoe, and as the natives, in order to manage the craft,
have to walk upon the outrigger, the distance B--C must not be too
great. In the Trobriands the distance B--C is about one-quarter, or
less, of the total length of the canoe. In the big, sea-going canoes,
it is always covered with a platform. In certain other districts, the
distance is much bigger, and the canoes have another type of rigging.

(iii) The size of the log (C) of which the float is formed. This,
in sea-going canoes, is usually of considerable dimensions. But, as
a solid piece of wood becomes heavy if soaked by water, too thick a
log would not be good.

These are all the essentials of construction in their functional
aspect, which will make clear further descriptions of sailing,
of building, and of using. For, indeed, though I have said that
technicalities are of secondary importance, still without grasping
them, we cannot understand references to the managing and rigging of
the canoes.

The Trobrianders use their craft for three main purposes, and
these correspond to the three types of canoe. Coastal transport,
especially in the Lagoon, requires small, light, handy canoes called
kewo'u (see Fig. II (1), and Plates XXIV, top foreground, and XXXVI,
to the right); for fishing, bigger and more seaworthy canoes called
kalipoulo (see Fig. II (2), and Plates XXIV, and XXXVI, to the left,
also XXXVII) are used; finally, for deep sea sailing, the biggest type
is needed, with a considerable carrying capacity, greater displacement,
and stronger construction. These are called masawa (see Fig. II (3)
and Plates XXI, XXIII, etc.). The word waga is a general designation
for all kinds of sailing craft.

Only a few words need to be said about the first two types, so as to
make, by means of comparison, the third type clearer. The construction
of the smallest canoes is sufficiently illustrated by the diagram (1)
in Fig. II. From this it is clear that it is a simple dug-out log,
connected with a float. It never has any built-up planking, and no
carved boards, nor as a rule any platform. In its economic aspect, it
is always owned by one individual, and serves his personal needs. No
mythology or magic is attached to it.

Type (2), as can be seen in Fig. II (2), differs in construction from
(1), in so far that it has its well enclosed by built-out planking and
carved prow-boards. A framework of six ribs helps to keep the planks
firmly attached to the dug-out and to hold them together. It is used in
fishing villages. These villages are organised into several fishing
detachments, each with a headman. He is the owner of the canoe,
he performs the fish magic, and among other privileges, obtains
the main yield of fish. But all his crew de facto have the right to
use the canoe and share in the yield. Here we come across the fact
that native ownership is not a simple institution, since it implies
definite rights of a number of men, combined with the paramount right
and title of one. There is a good deal of fishing magic, taboos and
customs connected with the construction of these canoes, and also
with their use, and they form the subject of a number of minor myths.

By far the most elaborate technically, the most seaworthy and
carefully built, are the sea-going canoes of the third type (see
Fig. II (3)). These are undoubtedly the greatest achievement of
craftsmanship of these natives. Technically, they differ from
the previously described kinds, in the amount of time spent over
their construction and the care given to details, rather than in
essentials. The well is formed by a planking built over a hollowed
log and closed up at both ends by carved, transversal prow-boards,
kept in position by others, longitudinal and of oval form. The whole
planking remains in place by means of ribs, as in the second type
of canoes, the kalipoulo, the fishing canoes, but all the parts are
finished and fitted much more perfectly, lashed with a better creeper,
and more thoroughly caulked. The carving, which in the fishing canoes
is often quite indifferent, here is perfect. Ownership of these canoes
is even more complex, and its construction is permeated with tribal
customs, ceremonial, and magic, the last based on mythology. The
magic is always performed in direct association with Kula expeditions.




III

After having thus spoken about, first, the general impression made by
a canoe and its psychological import, and then about the fundamental
features of its technology, we have to turn to the social implications
of a masawa (sea-going canoe).

The canoe is constructed by a group of people, it is owned, used and
enjoyed communally, and this is done according to definite rules. There
is therefore a social organisation underlying the building, the
owning, and the sailing of a canoe. Under these three headings, we
shall give an outline of the canoe's sociology, always bearing in mind
that these outlines have to be filled in in the subsequent account.

(A) Social organisation of labour in constructing a Canoe.

In studying the construction of a canoe, we see the natives engaged
in an economic enterprise on a big scale. Technical difficulties
face them, which require knowledge, and can only be overcome by
a continuous, systematic effort, and at certain stages must be
met by means of communal labour. All this obviously implies some
social organisation. All the stages of work, at which various people
have to co-operate, must be co-ordinated, there must be someone in
authority who takes the initiative and gives decisions; and there
must be also someone with a technical capacity, who directs the
construction. Finally, in Kiriwina, communal labour, and the services
of experts have to be paid for, and there must be someone who has
the means and is prepared to do it. [44] This economic organisation
rests on two fundamental facts--(1) the sociological differentiation
of functions, and (2) the magical regulation of work.

(1) The sociological differentiation of functions.--First of all there
is the owner of the canoe, that is, the chief, or the headman of a
village or of a smaller sub-division, who takes the responsibility
for the undertaking. He pays for the work, engages the expert, gives
orders, and commands communal labour.

Besides the owner, there is next another office of great sociological
importance, namely, that of the expert. He is the man who knows how
to construct the canoe, how to do the carvings, and, last, not least,
how to perform the magic. All these functions of the expert may be,
but not necessarily are, united in one person. The owner is always
one individual, but there may be two or even three experts.

Finally, the third sociological factor in canoe-building, consists
of the workers. And here there is a further division. First there
is a smaller group, consisting of the relations and close friends of
the owner or of the expert, who help throughout the whole process of
construction; and, secondly, there is, besides them, the main body of
villagers, who take part in the work at those stages where communal
labour is necessary.

(2) The magical regulation of work.--The belief in the efficiency of
magic is supreme among the natives of Boyowa, and they associate it
with all their vital concerns. In fact, we shall find magic interwoven
into all the many industrial and communal activities to be described
later on, as well as associated with every pursuit where either danger
or chance conspicuously enter. We shall have to describe, besides the
magic of canoe-making, that of propitious sailing, of shipwreck and
salvage, of Kula and of trade, of fishing, of obtaining spondylus and
Conus shell, and of protection against attack in foreign parts. It
is imperative that we should thoroughly grasp what magic means
to the natives and the rôle it plays in all their vital pursuits,
and a special chapter will be devoted to magical ideas and magical
practices in Kiriwina. Here, however, it is necessary to sketch the
main outlines, at least as far as canoe magic is concerned.

First of all, it must be realised that the natives firmly believe
in the value of magic, and that this conviction, when put to the
test of their actions, is quite unwavering, even nowadays when so
much of native belief and custom has been undermined. We may speak
of the sociological weight of tradition, that is of the degree to
which the behaviour of a community is affected by the traditional
commands of tribal law and customs. In the Trobriands, the general
injunction for always building canoes under the guidance of magic is
obeyed without the slightest deviation, for the tradition here weighs
very heavily. Up to the present, not one single masawa canoe has been
constructed without magic, indeed without the full observance of all
the rites and ceremonial. The forces that keep the natives to their
traditional course of behaviour are, in the first place, the specific
social inertia which obtains in all human societies and is the basis
of all conservative tendencies, and then the strong conviction that
if the traditional course were not taken, evil results would ensue. In
the case of canoes, the Trobrianders would be so firmly persuaded that
a canoe built without magic would be unseaworthy, slow in sailing,
and unlucky in the Kula, that no one would dream of omitting the
magic rites.

In the myths related elsewhere (Chap. XII) we shall see plainly the
power ascribed to magic in imparting speed and other qualities to a
canoe. According to native mythology, which is literally accepted,
and strongly believed, canoes could be even made to fly, had not the
necessary magic fallen into oblivion.

It is also important to understand rightly the natives' ideas
about the relation between magical efficiency and the results
of craftsmanship. Both are considered indispensable, but both
are understood to act independently. That is, the natives will
understand that magic, however efficient, will not make up for bad
workmanship. Each of these two has its own province: the builder
by his skill and knowledge makes the canoe stable and swift, and
magic gives it an additional stability and swiftness. If a canoe
is obviously badly built, the natives will know why it sails slowly
and is unwieldy. But if one of two canoes, both apparently equally
well constructed surpasses the other in some respect, this will be
attributed to magic.

Finally, speaking from a sociological point of view, what is the
economic function of magic in the process of canoe making? Is it
simply an extraneous action, having nothing to do with the real work
or its organisation? Is magic, from the economic point of view, a mere
waste of time? By no means. In reading the account which follows,
it will be seen clearly that magic puts order and sequence into
the various activities, and that it and its associated ceremonial
are instrumental in securing the co-operation of the community,
and the organisation of communal labour. As has been said before, it
inspires the builders with great confidence in the efficiency of their
work, a mental state essential in any enterprise of complicated and
difficult character. The belief that the magician is a man endowed
with special powers, controlling the canoe, makes him a natural
leader whose command is obeyed, who can fix dates, apportion work,
and keep the worker up to the mark.

Magic, far from being a useless appendage, or even a burden on
the work, supplies the psychological influence, which keeps people
confident about the success of their labour, and provides them with
a sort of natural leader. [45] Thus the organisation of labour in
canoe-building rests on the one hand on the division of functions,
those of the owner, the expert and the helpers, and on the other on
the co-operation between labour and magic.




IV

(B) Sociology of Canoe Ownership.

Ownership, giving this word its broadest sense, is the relation,
often very complex, between an object and the social community in
which it is found. In ethnology it is extremely important not to
use this word in any narrower sense than that just defined, because
the types of ownership found in various parts of the world differ
widely. It is especially a grave error to use the word ownership with
the very definite connotation given to it in our own society. For
it is obvious that this connotation presupposes the existence of
very highly developed economic and legal conditions, such as they
are amongst ourselves, and therefore the term "own" as we use it is
meaningless, when applied to a native society. Or indeed, what is
worse, such an application smuggles a number of preconceived ideas
into our description, and before we have begun to give an account of
the native conditions, we have distorted the reader's outlook.

Ownership has naturally in every type of native society, a different
specific meaning, as in each type, custom and tradition attach a
different set of functions, rites and privileges to the word. Moreover,
the social range of those who enjoy these privileges varies. Between
pure individual ownership and collectivism, there is a whole scale
of intermediate blendings and combinations.

In the Trobriands, there is a word which may be said approximately to
denote ownership, the prefix toli--followed by the name of the object
owned. Thus the compound word (pronounced without hiatus) toli-waga,
means "owner" or "master" of a canoe (waga); toli-bagula, the master of
the garden (bagula--garden); toli-bunukwa, owner of the pig; toli-megwa
(owner, expert in magic, etc.) This word has to be used as a clue to
the understanding of native ideas, but here again such a clue must
be used with caution. For, in the first place, like all abstract
native words, it covers a wide range, and has different meanings
in different contexts. And even with regard to one object, a number
of people may lay claim to ownership, claim to be toli--with regard
to it. In the second place, people having the full de facto right of
using an object, might not be allowed to call themselves toli--of this
object. This will be made clear in the concrete example of the canoe.

The word toli--in this example is restricted to one man only, who calls
himself toli-waga. Sometimes his nearest maternal relatives, such as
his brothers and maternal nephews, might call themselves collectively
toli-waga, but this would be an abuse of the term. Now, even the mere
privilege of using exclusively this title is very highly valued by
the natives. With this feature of the Trobriand social psychology,
that is with their characteristic ambition, vanity and desire to be
renowned and well spoken of, the reader of the following pages will
become very familiar. The natives, to whom the Kula and the sailing
expeditions are so important, will associate the name of the canoe
with that of its toli; they will identify his magical powers and
its good luck in sailing and in the Kula; they will often speak of
So-and-so's sailing here and there, of his being very fast in sailing,
etc., using in this the man's name for that of the canoe.

Turning now to the detailed determination of this relationship, the
most important point about it is that it always rests in the person
of the chief or headman. As we have seen in our short account of the
Trobrianders' sociology, the village community is always subject to
the authority of one chief or headman. Each one of these, whether his
authority extends over a small sectional village, or over a whole
district, has the means of accumulating a certain amount of garden
produce, considerable in the case of a chief, relatively small in
that of a headman, but always sufficient to defray the extra expenses
incidental to all communal enterprise. He also owns native wealth
condensed into the form of the objects of value called vaygu'a. Again,
a headman will have little, a big chief a large amount. But everyone
who is not a mere nobody, must possess at least a few stone blades,
a few kaloma belts, and some kuwa (small necklets). Thus in all types
of tribal enterprises, the chief or headman is able to bear the burden
of expense, and he also derives the main benefit from the affair. In
the case of the canoe, the chief, as we saw, acts as main organiser
in the construction, and he also enjoys the title of toli.

This strong economic position runs side by side with his direct
power, due to high rank, or traditional authority. In the case of
a small headman, it is due to the fact that he is at the head of a
big kinship group (the totemic sub-clan). Both combined, allow him
to command labour and to reward for it.

This title of toliwaga, besides the general social distinction which
it confers, implies further a definite series of social functions
with regard to its individual bearer.

(1) There are first the formal and ceremonial privileges. Thus, the
toliwaga has the privilege of acting as spokesman of his community
in all matters of sailing or construction. He assembles the council,
informal or formal as the case may be, and opens the question of
when the sailing will take place. This right of initiative is purely
a nominal one, because both in construction and sailing, the date
of enterprise is determined by outward causes, such as reciprocity
to overseas tribes, seasons, customs, etc. Nevertheless, the formal
privilege is strictly confined to the toliwaga, and highly valued. The
position of master and leader of ceremonies, of general spokesman,
lasts right through the successive stages of the building of the
canoe, and its subsequent use, and we shall meet with it in all the
ceremonial phases of the Kula.

(2) The economic uses and advantages derived from a canoe are not
limited to the toliwaga. He, however, gets the lion's share. He has,
of course, in all circumstances, the privilege of absolute priority
in being included in the party. He also receives always by far the
greatest proportion of Kula valuables, and other articles on every
occasion. This, however, is in virtue of his general position as chief
or headman, and should perhaps not be included under this heading. But
a very definite and strictly individual advantage is that of being
able to dispose of the canoe for hire, and of receiving the payment
for it. The canoe can be, and often is, hired out from a headman,
who at a given season has no intention of sailing, by another one,
as a rule from a different district, who embarks on an expedition. The
reason of this is, that the chief or headman who borrows, may at that
time not be able to have his own canoe repaired, or construct another
new one. The payment for hire is called toguna, and it consists of
a vaygu'a. Besides this, the best vaygu'a obtained on the expedition
would be kula'd to the man from whom the canoe was hired. [46]

(3) The toliwaga has definite social privileges, and exercises definite
functions, in the running of a canoe. Thus, he selects his companions,
who will sail in his canoe, and has the nominal right to choose or
reject those who may go on the expedition with him. Here again the
privilege is much shorn of its value by many restrictions imposed on
the chief by the nature of things. Thus, on the one hand, his veyola
(maternal kinsmen) have, according to all native ideas of right and
law, a strong claim on the canoe. Again, a man of rank in a community
could be excluded from an expedition only with difficulty, if he
wished to go and there were no special grievance against him. But if
there were such a cause, if the man had offended the chief, and were
on bad terms with him, he himself would not even try to embark. There
are actual examples of this on record. Another class of people having
a de facto right to sail are the sailing experts. In the coastal
villages like Sinaketa there are many of these; in inland ones,
like Omarakana, there are few. So in one of these inland places,
there are men who always go in a canoe, whenever it is used; who
have even a good deal to say in all matters connected with sailing,
yet who would never dare to use the title of toliwaga, and would
even definitely disclaim it if it were given to them. To sum up:
the chief's privilege of choice is limited by two conditions, the
rank and the seamanship of those he may select. As we have seen,
he fulfils definite functions in the construction of the canoe. We
shall see later on that he has also definite functions in sailing.

(4) A special feature, implied in the title of toliwaga, is the
performance of magical duties. It will be made clear that magic during
the process of construction is done by the expert, but magic done in
connection with sailing and Kula is done by the toliwaga. The latter
must, by definition, know canoe magic. The rôle of magic in this,
and the taboos, ceremonial activities, and special customs associated
with it, will come out clearly in the consecutive account of a Kula
expedition.




V

(C) The Social Division of Functions in the Manning and Sailing of
the Canoe.

Very little is to be said under this heading here, since to understand
this we must know more about the technicalities of sailing. We shall
deal with this subject later on (Chap. IX, Div. II), and there
the social organisation within the canoe--such as it is--will be
indicated. Here it may be said that a number of men have definite
tasks assigned to them, and they keep to these. As a rule a man will
specialise, let us say, as steersman, and will always have the rudder
given to his care. Captainship, carrying with it definite duties,
powers and responsibilities, as a position distinct from that of the
toliwaga, does not exist. The owner of the canoe will always take the
lead and give orders, provided that he is a good sailor. Otherwise the
best sailor from the crew will say what is to be done when difficulties
or dangers arise. As a rule, however, everyone knows his task, and
everyone performs it in the normal course of events.

A short outline of the concrete details referring to the distribution
of canoes in the Trobriands must be given here. A glance at the map of
Boyowa shows that various districts have not the same opportunities
for sailing, and not all of them direct access to the sea. Moreover,
the fishing villages on the Lagoon, where fishing and sailing have
constantly to be done, will naturally have more opportunities for
cultivating the arts of sailing and ship-building. And indeed we find
that the villages of the two inland districts, Tilataula and Kuboma,
know nothing about ship-building and sailing, and possess no canoes;
the villages in Kiriwina and Luba, on the east coast, with indirect
access to the sea, have only one canoe each, and few building experts;
while some villagers on the Lagoon are good sailors and excellent
builders. The best centres for canoe-building are found in the islands
of Vakuta and Kayleula and to a lesser degree this craft flourishes
in the village of Sinaketa. The island of Kitava is the traditional
building centre, and at present the finest canoes as well as the best
canoe carvings come from there. In this description of canoes, this
island, which really belongs to the Eastern rather than to the Western
branch of the N. Massim, must be included in the account, since all
Boyowan canoe mythology and canoe industry is associated with Kitava.

There are at present some sixty-four Masawa canoes in the Trobriands
and Kitava. Out of these, some four belong to the Northern district,
where Kula is not practised; all the rest are built and used for the
Kula. In the foregoing chapters I have spoken about "Kula communities,"
that is, such groups of villages as carry on the Kula as a whole,
sail together on overseas expeditions, and do their internal Kula
with one another. We shall group the canoes according to the Kula
community to which they belong.


            Kiriwina                         8 canoes.
            Luba                             3   ,,
            Sinaketa                         8   ,,
            Vakuta                          22   ,,
            Kayleula               about    20   ,,
            Kitava                 about    12   ,,
                                            ----------
            Total for all Kula communities  60 canoes.


To this number, the canoes of the Northern district must be added,
but they are never used in the Kula. In olden days, this figure was,
on a rough estimate, more than double of what it is now, because,
first of all, there are some villages which had canoes in the old
days and now have none, and then the number of villages which became
extinct a few generations ago is considerable. About half a century
ago, there were in Vakuta alone about sixty canoes, in Sinaketa
at least twenty, in Kitava thirty, in Kiriwina twenty, and in Luba
ten. When all the canoes from Sinaketa and Vakuta sailed south, and
some twenty to thirty more joined them from the Amphletts and Tewara,
quite a stately fleet would approach Dobu.

Turning now to the list of ownership in Kiriwina, the most important
canoe is, of course, that owned by the chief of Omarakana. This
canoe always leads the fleet; that is to say, on big ceremonial Kula
sailings, called uvalaku, it has the privileged position. It lives
in a big shed on the beach of Kaulukuba (see Plates XXII, XXX),
distant about one mile from the village, the beach on which also
each new canoe is made. The present canoe (see Plates XXI and XLI)
is called Nigada Bu'a--"begging for an areca-nut." Every canoe has a
personal name of its own, sometimes just an appropriate expression,
like the one quoted, sometimes derived from some special incident. When
a new canoe is built, it often inherits the name of its predecessor,
but sometimes it gets a new name. The present Omarakana canoe was
constructed by a master-builder from Kitava, who also carved the
ornamental prow-board. There is no one now in Omarakana who can
build or carve properly. The magic over the latter stages ought to
have been recited by the present chief, To'uluwa, but as he has very
little capacity for remembering spells, the magic was performed by
one of his kinsmen.

All the other canoes of Kiriwina are also housed in hangars, each
on a beach of clean, white sand on the Eastern coast. The chief or
headman of each village is the toliwaga. In Kasana'i, the sub-village
of Omarakana, the canoe, called in feigned modesty tokwabu (something
like "landlubber"), was built by Ibena, a chief of equal rank, but
smaller power than To'uluwa, and he is also the toliwaga. Some other
characteristic names of the canoes are:--Kuyamataym'--"Take care of
yourself," that is, "because I shall get ahead of you"; the canoe
of Liluta, called Siya'i, which is the name of a Government station,
where some people from Liluta were once imprisoned; Topusa--a flying
fish; Yagwa'u--a scarecrow; Akamta'u--"I shall eat men," because the
canoe was a gift from the cannibals of Dobu.

In the district of Luba there are at present only three canoes; one
belongs to the chief of highest rank in the village of Olivilevi. This
is the biggest canoe in all the Trobriands. Two are in the village
of Wawela, and belong to two headmen, each ruling over a section of
the village; one of them is seen being relashed on Plate XXVII.

The big settlement of Sinaketa, consisting of sectional villages,
has also canoes. There are about four expert builders and carvers,
and almost every man there knows a good deal about construction. In
Vakuta the experts are even more numerous, and this is also the case
in Kayleula and Kitava.









CHAPTER V

THE CEREMONIAL BUILDING OF A WAGA


I

The building of the sea-going canoe (masawa) is inextricably bound
up with the general proceedings of the Kula. As we have said before,
in all villages where Kula is practised the masawa canoes are built
and repaired only in direct connection with it. That is, as soon as
a Kula expedition is decided upon, and its date fixed, all the canoes
of the village must be overhauled, and those too old for repair must
be replaced by new ones. As the overhauling differs only slightly
from building in the later, ceremonial stages of the procedure,
the account in this chapter covers both.

To the native, the construction of the canoe is the first link in
the chain of the Kula performances. From the moment that the tree is
felled till the return of the oversea party, there is one continuous
flow of events, following in regular succession. Not only that:
as we shall see, the technicalities of construction are interrupted
and punctuated by magical rites. Some of these refer to the canoe,
others belong to the Kula. Thus, canoe-building and the first stage
of Kula dovetail into one another. Again, the launching of the canoe,
and especially the kabigidoya (the formal presentation visit) are
in one respect the final acts of canoe-building, and in another
they belong to the Kula. In giving the account of canoe-building,
therefore, we start on the long sequence of events which form a Kula
expedition. No account of the Kula could be considered complete in
which canoe-building had been omitted.

In this chapter, the incidents will be related one after the other
as they happen in the normal routine of tribal life, obeying the
commands of custom, and the indications of belief, the latter acting
more rigidly and strongly even than the former. It will be necessary,
in following this consecutive account, to keep in mind the definite,
sociological mechanism underlying the activities, and the system of
ideas at work in regulating labour and magic. The social organisation
has been described in the previous chapter. We shall remember that
the owner, the expert or experts, a small group of helpers, and
the whole community are the social factors, each of which fulfils a
different function in the organisation and performance of work. As
to the magical ideas which govern the various rites, they will be
analysed later on in the course of this and some of the following
chapters, and also in Chapter XVII. Here it must suffice to say that
they belong to several different systems of ideas. The one based on
the myth of the flying canoe refers directly to the canoe; it aims
at imparting a general excellence, and more especially the quality of
speed to the canoe. The rites of the other type are really exorcisms
directed against evil bewitchment (bulubwalata) of which the natives
are much afraid. The third system of magic (performed during canoe
construction) is the Kula magic, based on its own mythological cycle,
and although performed on the canoe, yet aiming at the imparting of
success to the toliwaga in his Kula transactions. Finally, at the
beginnings of the proceedings there is some magic addressed to the
tokway, the malignant wood-sprite.

The construction of the canoe is done in two main stages, differing
from one another in the character of the work, in the accompanying
magic, and in the general sociological setting. In the first stage,
the component parts of the canoe are prepared. A big tree is cut,
trimmed into a log, then hollowed out and made into the basic dug-out;
the planks, boards, poles, and sticks are prepared. This is achieved
by slow, leisurely work, and it is done by the canoe-builder with
the assistance of a few helpers, usually his relatives or friends
or else those of the toliwaga. This stage generally takes a long
time, some two to six months, and is done in fits and starts, as
other occupations allow, or the mood comes. The spells and rites
which accompany it belong to the tokway magic, and to that of the
flying canoe cycle. To this first stage also belongs the carving of
the decorative prow-boards. This is done sometimes by the builder,
sometimes by another expert, if the builder cannot carve.

The second stage is done by means of intense communal labour. As a
rule this stage is spread over a short time, only perhaps a week or
two--including the pauses between work. The actual labour, in which
the whole community is energetically engaged, takes up only some three
to five days. The work consists of the piecing together of the planks
and prow-boards, and, in case these do not fit well, of trimming them
appropriately, and then of the lashing them together. Next comes the
piecing and lashing of the outrigger, caulking and painting of the
canoe. Sail-making is also done at this time, and belongs to this
stage. As a rule, the main body of the canoe is constructed at one
sitting, lasting about a day; that is, the prow-boards are put in,
the ribs and planks fitted together, trimmed and lashed. Another day
is devoted to the attaching of the float and binding of the outrigger
frame and the platform. Caulking and painting are done at another
sitting, or perhaps at two more, while the sail is made on yet another
day. These times are only approximate, since the size of the canoe,
as well as the number of people participating in communal labour,
greatly varies. The second stage of canoe-building is accompanied
by Kula magic, and by a series of exorcisms on the canoe, and the
magic is performed by the owner of the canoe, and not by the builder
or expert. This latter, however, directs the technicalities of the
proceedings, in which he is assisted and advised by builders from
other villages; by sailing experts, and by the toliwaga and other
notables. The lashing of the canoe with a specially strong creeper,
called wayugo, is accompanied by perhaps the most important of the
rites and spells belonging to the flying canoe magic.




II

After the decision to build a waga has been taken, a tree suitable
for the main log has to be chosen. This, in the Trobriands, is not a
very easy task. As the whole plain is taken up by garden land, only
the small patches of fertile soil in the coral ridge which runs all
round the island, remain covered with jungle. There the tree must be
found, there felled, and thence transported to the village.

Once the tree is chosen, the toliwaga, the builder and a few helpers
repair to the spot, and a preliminary rite must be performed, before
they begin to cut it down. A small incision is made into the trunk,
so that a particle of food, or a bit of areca-nut can be put into
it. Giving this as an offering to the tokway (wood-sprite), the
magician utters an incantation:--


                          VABUSI TOKWAY SPELL.

    "Come down, O wood-sprites, O Tokway, dwellers in branches, come
    down! Come down, dwellers in branch forks, in branch shoots! Come
    down, come, eat! Go to your coral outcrop over there; crowd there,
    swarm there, be noisy there, scream there!

    "Step down from our tree, old men! This is a canoe ill spoken of;
    this is a canoe out of which you have been shamed; this is a canoe
    out of which you have been expelled! At sunrise and morning, you
    help us in felling the canoe; this our tree, old men, let it go
    and fall down!"


This spell, given in free translation, which, however, follows the
original very closely, word for word, is far clearer than the average
sample of Trobriand magic. In the first part, the tokway is invoked
under various names, and invited to leave his abode, and to move to
some other place, and there to be at his ease. In the second part,
the canoe is mentioned with several epithets, all of which denote an
act of discourtesy or ill-omen. This is obviously done to compel the
tokway to leave the tree. In Boyowa, the yoba, the chasing away, is
under circumstances a great insult, and at times it commands immediate
compliance. This is always the case when the chaser belongs to the
local sub-clan of a village, and the person expelled does not. But the
yoba is always an act of considerable consequence, never used lightly,
and in this spell, it carries these sociological associations with
it. In the usual anticipatory way, characteristic of native speech,
the tree is called in the spell "canoe" (waga).

The object of this spell is written very plainly in every word of
it, and the natives also confirm it by saying that it is absolutely
necessary to get rid of the tokway. What would happen, however, if
the tokway were not expelled, is not so unequivocally laid down by
tradition, and it cannot be read out of the spell or the rite. Some
informants say that the canoe would be heavy; others that the wood
would be full of knots, and that there would be holes in the canoe,
or that it would quickly rot.

But though the rationale of the expulsion is not so well defined, the
belief in the tokway's evil influence, and in the dangers associated
with his presence is positive. And this is in keeping with the general
nature of the tokway, as we find him delineated by native belief. The
tokway is on the whole a harmful being, though the harm he does is
seldom more than an unpleasant trick, perhaps a sudden fright, an
attack of shooting pains, or a theft. The tokway live in trees or in
coral rocks and boulders, usually in the raybwag, the primeval jungle,
growing on the coastal ridge, full of outcrops and rocks. Some people
have seen a tokway, although he is invisible at will. His skin is
brown, like that of any Boyowan, but he has long, sleek hair, and
a long beard. He comes often at night, and frightens people. But,
though seldom seen, the tokway's wailing is often heard from the
branches of a big tree, and some trees evidently harbour more tokways
than others, since you can hear them very easily there. Sometimes,
over such trees, where people often hear the tokway and get a fright,
the above quoted incantation and rite are performed.

In their contact with men, the tokway show their unpleasant side;
often they come at night and steal food. Many cases can be quoted
when a man, as it seemed, was surprised in the act of stealing yams
out of a storehouse, but lo! when approached he disappeared--it was
a tokway. Then, sickness in some of its lighter forms is caused by
the tokway. Shooting pains, pricking and stabbing in one's inside,
are often due to him, for he is in possession of magic by which
he can insert small, sharp-edged and sharp-pointed objects into
the body. Fortunately some men know magic by which to extract
such objects. These men, of course, according to the general rule
of sorcery, can also inflict the same ailments. In olden days,
the tokway gave both the harmful and beneficent magic to some men,
and ever since, this form of sorcery and of concomitant healing have
been handed on from one generation to another.

Let us return to our canoe, however. After the rite has been performed,
the tree is felled. In olden days, when stone implements were used,
this must have been a laborious process, in which a number of men
were engaged in wielding the axe, and others in re-sharpening the
blunted or broken blades. The old technique was more like nibbling
away the wood in small chips, and it must have taken a long time to
cut out a sufficiently deep incision to fell the tree. After the tree
is on the ground, the preliminary trimming is done on the spot. The
branches are lopped off, and the log of appropriate length is made
out of the tree. This log is cut into the rough shape of a canoe,
so as to make it as light as possible, for now it has to be pulled
to the village or to the beach.

The transporting of the log is not an easy task, as it has to be
taken out of the uneven, rocky raybwag, and then pulled along very
bad roads. Pieces of wood are put on the ground every few metres,
to serve as slips on which the log can more easily glide than on the
rocks and uneven soil. In spite of that, and in spite of the fact that
many men are summoned to assist, the work of pulling the log is very
heavy. The men receive food in payment for it. Pig flesh is cooked
and distributed with baked yams; at intervals during the work they
refresh themselves with green coco-nut drinks and with sucking sugar
cane. Gifts of such food, given during work in payment of communal
labour, are called puwaya. To describe how heavy the work sometimes
is, the native will say, in a characteristically figurative manner:


    "The pig, the coco drinks, the yams are finished, and yet we
    pull--very heavy!"


In such cases the natives resort to a magical rite which makes
the canoe lighter. A piece of dry banana leaf is put on top of the
log. The owner or builder beats the log with a bunch of dry lalang
grass and utters the following spell:


                           KAYMOMWA'U SPELL.

    "Come down, come down, defilement by contact with excrement! Come
    down, defilement by contact with refuse! Come down, heaviness! Come
    down, rot! Come down fungus! ..." and soon, invoking a number of
    deteriorations to leave the log, and then a number of defilements
    and broken taboos. In other words, the heaviness and slowness,
    due to all these magical causes, are thrown out of the log.


This bunch of grass is then ritually thrown away. It is called momwa'u,
or the "heavy bunch." Another handful of the long lalang grass,
seared and dry, is taken, and this is the gagabile, the "light bunch,"
and with this the canoe is again beaten. The meaning of the rite is
quite plain: the first bunch takes into it the heaviness of the log,
and the second imparts lightness to it. Both spells also express this
meaning in plain terms. The second spell, recited with the gagabile
bunch, runs thus:


                           KAYGAGABILE SPELL.

    "He fails to outrun me" (repeated many times). "The canoe trembles
    with speed" (many times). A few untranslatable words are uttered;
    then a long chain of ancestral names is invoked. "I lash you,
    O tree; the tree flies; the tree becomes like a breath of wind;
    the tree becomes like a butterfly; the tree becomes like a cotton
    seed fluff. One sun" (i.e., time) "for my companions, midday
    sun, setting sun; another sun for me----" (here the reciter's
    name is uttered)--"the rising sun, the rays of the (rising) sun,
    (the time of) opening the huts, (the time of the) rising of the
    morning star!" The last part means: "My companions arrive at
    sunset, while I arrive with the rising sun"--(indicating how far
    my canoe exceeds them in speed.) [47]


These formulæ are used both to make the log lighter for the present
purpose of pulling it into the village, and in order to give it
greater speed in general, when it is made up into a waga.

After the log has been finally brought into the village, and left
on the baku, the main central place, the creeper by means of which
it has been pulled and which is called in this connection duku,
is not cut away at once. This is done ceremonially on the morning
of the following day, sometimes after even two or three days have
passed. The men of the community assemble, and the one who will scoop
out the canoe, the builder (tota'ila waga, "the cutter of the canoe")
performs a magical rite. He takes his adze (ligogu) and wraps some very
light and thin herbs round the blade with a piece of dried banana leaf,
itself associated with the idea of lightness. This he wraps only half
round, so that a broad opening is left, and the breath and voice have
free access to the herbs and blade of the adze. Into this opening,
the magician chants the following long spell:


                         KAPITUNENA DUKU SPELL.

    "I shall wave them back, (i.e., prevent all other canoes from
    overtaking me)!" repeated many times. "On the top of Si'a Hill;
    women of Tokuna; my mother a sorceress, myself a sorcerer. It
    dashes forward, it flies ahead. The canoe body is light; the
    pandanus streamers are aflutter; the prow skims the waves;
    the ornamental boards leap, like dolphins; the tabuyo (small
    prow-board) breaks the waves; the lagim' (transversal prow-board)
    breaks the waves. Thou sleepest in the mountain, thou sleepest
    in Kuyawa Island. We shall kindle a small fire of lalang grass,
    we shall burn aromatic herbs (i.e., at our destination in the
    mountains)! Whether new or old, thou goest ahead."

    This is the exordium of the formula. Then comes a very long middle
    part, in a form very characteristic of Trobriand magic. This
    form resembles a litany, in so far as a key word or expression
    is repeated many times with a series of complementary words and
    expressions. Then the first key word is replaced by another, which
    in its turn, is repeated with the same series of expressions;
    then comes another key word, and so on. We have thus two series
    of words; each term of the first is repeated over and over again,
    with all terms of the second, and in this manner, with a limited
    number of words, a spell is very much lengthened out, since its
    length is the product of the length of both series. In shorter
    spells, there may be only one key word, and in fact, this is the
    more usual type. In this spell, the first series consists of nouns
    denoting different parts of the canoe; the second are verbs, such
    as: to cut, to fly, to speed, to cleave a fleet of other canoes,
    to disappear, to skim over the waves. Thus the litany runs in such
    a fashion: "The tip of my canoe starts, the tip of my canoe flies,
    the tip of my canoe speeds, etc., etc." After the long litany has
    been chanted, the magician repeats the exordium, and finishes it
    off with the conventional onomatopoetic word saydididi--which is
    meant to imitate the flying of the witches.


After the recital of this long spell over the herbs and blade of his
adze, the magician wraps up the dry banana leaf, thus imprisoning
the magical virtue of the spell round the blade, and with this, he
strikes and cuts through the duku (the creeper used for the pulling
of the canoes.)

With this, the magic is not over yet, for on the same evening, when
the canoe is put on transversal logs (nigakulu), another rite has to
be carried out. Some herbs are placed on the transversals between them
and the body of the big canoe log. Over these herbs, again, another
spell has to be uttered. In order not to overload this account with
magical texts, I shall not adduce this spell in detail. Its wording
also plainly indicates that it is speed magic, and it is a short
formula running on directly, without cross-repetitions.

After that, for some days, the outside of the canoe body is worked. Its
two ends must be cut into tapering shape, and the bottom evened and
smoothed. After that is done, the canoe has to be turned over, this
time into its natural position, bottom down, and what is to be the
opening, upwards. Before the scooping out begins, another formula has
to be recited over the kavilali, a special ligogu (adze), used for
scooping out, which is inserted into a handle with a moveable part,
which then allows the cutting to be done at varying angles to the
plane of striking.

The rite stands in close connection to the myth of the flying
canoe, localised in Kudayuri, a place in the Island of Kitava, and
many allusions are made to this myth. [48] After a short exordium,
containing untranslatable magical words, and geographical references,
the spell runs:


                             LIGOGU SPELL.

    "I shall take hold of an adze, I shall strike! I shall enter my
    canoe, I shall make thee fly, O canoe, I shall make thee jump! We
    shall fly like butterflies, like wind; we shall disappear in
    mist, we shall vanish. You will pierce the straits of Kadimwatu
    (between the islands of Tewara and Uwama) you will break the
    promontory of Saramwa (near Dobu), pierce the passage of Loma (in
    Dawson Straits), die away in the distance, die away with the wind,
    fade away with the mist, vanish away. Break through your seaweeds
    (i.e., on coming against the shore). Put on your wreath (probably
    an allusion to the seaweeds), make your bed in the sand. I turn
    round, I see the Vakuta men, the Kitava men behind me; my sea,
    the sea of Pilolu (i.e., the sea between the Trobriands and the
    Amphletts); to-day the Kudayuri men will burn their fires (i.e.,
    on the shores of Dobu). Bind your grass skirt together, O canoe"
    (here the personal name of the canoe is mentioned), "fly!" The
    last phrase contains an implicit hint that the canoe partakes
    of the nature of a flying witch, as it should, according to the
    Kudayuri myth.


After this, the canoe-builder proceeds to scoop out the log. This is
a long task, and a heavy one, and one which requires a good deal of
skill, especially towards the end, when the walls of the dug-out have
to be made sufficiently thin, and when the wood has to be taken off
evenly over the whole surface. Thus, although at the beginning the
canoe carpenter is usually helped by a few men--his sons or brothers
or nephews who in assisting him also learn the trade--towards the end
he has to do the work single-handed. It, therefore, always happens
that this stage takes a very long time. Often the canoe will lie
for weeks, untouched, covered with palm leaves against the sun,
and filled with some water to prevent drying and cracking (see Plate
XXV). Then the carpenter will set to work for a few days, and pause
again. In almost all villages, the canoe is put up in the central
place, or before the builder's hut. In some of the Eastern villages,
the scooping out is done on the sea beach, to avoid pulling the heavy
log to and from the village.

Parallel with the process of hollowing out, the other parts of the
canoe are made ready to be pieced together. Four broad and long
planks form the gunwale; L-shaped pieces of wood are cut into ribs;
long poles are prepared for longitudinal support of the ribs, and
for platform rafters; short poles are made ready as transversals of
the platform and main supports of the outrigging; small sticks to
connect the float with the transversals; finally, the float itself,
a long, bulky log. These are the main, constituent parts of a canoe,
to be made by the builder. The four carved boards are also made by
him if he knows how to carve, otherwise another expert has to do this
part of the work (see Plate XXVI).

When all the parts are ready, another magical rite has to be
performed. It is called "kapitunela nanola waga": "the cutting off
of the canoe's mind," an expression which denotes a change of mind,
a final determination. In this case, the canoe makes up its mind to
run quickly. The formula is short, contains at the beginning a few
obscure words, and then a few geographical references to some places
in the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago. It is recited over a few drops
of coco-nut oil, which is then wrapped up in a small bundle. The same
spell is then again spoken over the ligogu blade, round which a piece
of dry banana has been wrapped in the manner described above. The
canoe is turned bottom up, the bundle with coco-nut oil placed on it
and struck with the adze. With this the canoe is ready to be pieced
together, and the first stage of its construction is over.




III

As has been said above, the two stages differ from one another in
the nature of work done and in their sociological and ceremonial
setting. So far, we have seen only a few men engaged in cutting the
tree and scooping it out and then preparing the various parts of the
canoe. Industriously, but slowly and deliberately, with many pauses,
they toil over their work, sitting on the brown, trodden soil of the
village in front of the huts, or scooping the canoe in the central
place. The first part of the task, the felling of the tree, took us
to the tall jungle and intricate undergrowth, climbing and festooned
around the fantastic shapes of coral rocks.

Now, with the second stage, the scene shifts to the clean, snow-white
sand of a coral beach, where hundreds of natives in festive array
crowd around the freshly scraped body of the canoe. The carved boards,
painted in black, white and red, the green fringe of palms and jungle
trees, the blue of the sea--all lend colour to the vivid and lively
scene. Thus I saw the building of a canoe done on the East shore
of the Trobriands, and in this setting I remember it. In Sinaketa,
instead of the blue, open sea, breaking in a belt of white foam
outside on the fringing reef and coming in limpid waves to the beach,
there are the dull, muddy browns and greens of the Lagoon, playing
into pure emerald tints where the clean sandy bottom begins.

Into one of these two scenes, we must now imagine the dug-out
transported from the village, after all is ready, and after the summons
of the chief or headman has gone round the neighbouring villages. In
the case of a big chief, several hundreds of natives will assemble
to help, or to gaze on the performance. When a small community with
a second-rate headman construct their canoe, only a few dozen people
will come, the relatives-in-law of the headman and of other notables,
and their close friends.

After the body of the canoe and all the accessories have been placed
in readiness, the proceedings are opened by a magical rite, called
Katuliliva tabuyo. This rite belongs to the Kula magic, for which
the natives have a special expression; they call it mwasila. It is
connected with the inserting of the ornamental prow-boards into their
grooves at both ends of the canoe. These ornamental parts of the canoe
are put in first of all, and this is done ceremonially. A few sprigs
of the mint plant are inserted under the boards, as they are put in,
and the toliwaga (owner of the canoe) hammers the boards in by means
of a special stone imported from Dobu, and ritually repeats a formula
of the mwasila magic. The mint plant (sulumwoya) plays an important
part in the mwasila (Kula magic) as well as in love spells, and in
the magic of beauty. Whenever a substance is to be medicated for the
purpose of charming, seducing, or persuading, as a rule sulumwoya
is used. This plant figures also in several myths, where it plays a
similar part, the mythical hero always conquering the foe or winning
a woman by the use of the sulumwoya.

I shall not adduce the magical formulæ in this account, with the
exception of the most important one. Even a short summary of each
of them would obstruct the narrative, and it would blur completely
the outline of the consecutive account of the various activities. The
various complexities of the magical ritual and of the formulæ will be
set forth in Chapter XVII. It may be mentioned here, however, that not
only are there several types of magic performed during canoe building,
such as the mwasila (Kula magic), the canoe speed magic, exorcisms
against evil magic, and exorcism of the tokway, but within each of
these types, there are different systems of magic, each with its own
mythological basis, each localised in a different district, and each
having of course different formulæ and slightly different rites. [49]

After the prow-boards are put in, and before the next bit of technical
work is done, another magical rite has to be performed. The body of
the canoe, now bright with the three-coloured boards, is pushed into
the water. A handful of leaves, of a shrub called bobi'u, is charmed
by the owner or by the builder, and the body of the canoe is washed in
sea water with the leaves. All the men participate in the washing, and
this rite is intended to make the canoe fast, by removing the traces of
any evil influence, which might still have remained, in spite of the
previous magic, performed on the waga. After the waga has been rubbed
and washed, it is pulled ashore again and placed on the skid logs.

Now the natives proceed to the main and most important constructive
part of their work; this consists of the erection of the gunwale
planks at the sides of the dug-out log, so as to form the deep and
wide well of the built-up canoe. They are kept in position by an
internal framework of some twelve to twenty pairs of ribs, and all
of this is lashed together with a special creeper called wayugo,
and the holes and interstices are caulked with a resinous substance.

I cannot enter here into details of building, though from the
technological point of view, this is the most interesting phase,
showing us the native at grips with real problems of construction. He
has a whole array of component parts, and he must make them fit
together with a considerable degree of precision, and that without
having any exact means of measurement. By a rough appreciation based on
long experience and great skill, he estimates the relative shapes and
sizes of the planks, the angles and dimensions of the ribs, and the
lengths of the various poles. Then, in shaping them out, the builder
tests and fits them in a preliminary manner as work goes on, and as a
rule the result is good. But now, when all these component parts have
to be pieced finally together, it nearly always happens that some bit
or other fails to fit properly with the rest. These details have to
be adjusted, a bit taken off the body of the canoe, a plank or pole
shortened, or even a piece added. The natives have a very efficient
way of lashing on a whole bit of a plank, if this proves too short,
or if, by some accident, it breaks at the end. After all has been
finally fitted, and made to tally, the framework of ribs is put into
the canoe (see Plate XXVII), and the natives proceed to lash them to
the body of the dug-out, and to the two longitudinal poles to which
the ribs are threaded.

And now a few words must be said about the wayugo, the lashing
creeper. Only one species of creeper is used for the lashing of boats,
and it is of the utmost importance that this creeper should be sound
and strong. It is this alone that maintains the cohesion of the various
parts, and in rough weather, very much depends on how the lashings
will stand the strain. The other parts of the canoe--the outrigger
poles--can be more easily tested, and as they are made of strong,
elastic wood, they usually stand any weather quite well. Thus the
element of danger and uncertainty in a canoe is due mainly to the
creeper. No wonder, therefore, that the magic of the creeper is
considered as one of the most important ritual items in canoe-building.

In fact, wayugo, the name of that creeper species, is also used as
a general term for canoe magic. When a man has the reputation of
building or owning a good and fast canoe, the usual way of explaining
it is to say that he has, or knows "a good wayugo." For, as in all
other magic, there are several types of wayugo spells. The ritual is
always practically the same: five coils of the creeper are, on the
previous day, placed on a large wooden dish and chanted over in the
owner's hut by himself. Only exceptionally can this magic be done by
the builder. Next day they are brought to the beach ceremonially on
the wooden plate. In one of the wayugo systems, there is an additional
rite, in which the toliwaga (canoe owner) takes a piece of the creeper,
inserts it into one of the holes pierced in the rim of the dug-out for
the lashing, and pulling it to and fro, recites once more the spell.

In consideration of the importance of this magic, the formula will
be here adduced in full. It consists of an exordium (u'ula), a double
main part (tapwana), and a concluding period (dogina). [50]


                             WAYUGO SPELL.

    In the u'ula he first repeats "Sacred (or ritual) eating of fish,
    sacred inside," thus alluding to a belief that the toliwaga
    has in connection with this magic to partake ritually of baked
    fish. Then come the words--"Flutter, betel plant, leaving behind,"
    all associated with leading ideas of canoe magic--the flutter of
    pandanus streamers; the betel-nut, which the ancestral spirits
    in other rites are invited to partake of; the speed by which all
    comrades will be left behind!

    A list of ancestral names follows. Two of them, probably
    mythical personages, have significative names; "Stormy sea" and
    "Foaming." Then the baloma (spirits) of these ancestors are asked
    to sit on the canoe slips and to chew betel, and they are invoked
    to take the pandanus streamer of the Kudayuri--a place in Kitava,
    where the flying canoe magic originated--and plant it on top of
    Teula or Tewara, the small island off the East coast of Fergusson.

    The magician after that chants: "I shall turn, I shall turn
    towards you, O men of Kitava, you remain behind on the To'uru
    beach (in the Lagoon of Vakuta). Before you lies the sea arm of
    Pilolu. To-day, they kindle the festive fire of the Kudayuri, thou,
    O my boat" (here the personal name of the boat is uttered), "bind
    thy skirts together and fly!" In this passage--which is almost
    identical with one in the previously quoted Ligogu spell--there
    is a direct allusion to the Kudayuri myth, and to the custom of
    festive fires. Again the canoe is addressed as a woman who has to
    bind her grass petticoat together during her flight, a reference
    to the belief that a flying witch binds her skirts when starting
    into the air and to the tradition that this myth originates from
    Na'ukuwakula, one of the flying Kudayuri sisters. The following
    main part continues with this mythical allusion: Na'ukuwakula
    flew from Kitava through Sinaketa and Kayleula to Simsim, where
    she settled down and transmitted the magic to her progeny. In
    this spell the three places: Kuyawa (a creek and hillock near
    Sinaketa), Dikutuwa (a rock near Kayleula), and La'u (a cleft
    rock in the sea near Simsim, in the Lousançay Islands) are the
    leading words of the tapwana.

    The last sentence of the first part, forming a transition into
    the tapwana, runs as follows: "I shall grasp the handle of the
    adze, I shall grip all the component parts of the canoe"--perhaps
    another allusion to the mythical construction of the Kudayuri canoe
    (comp. Chap. XII, Div. IV)--"I shall fly on the top of Kuyawa,
    I shall disappear; dissolve in mist, in smoke; become like a wind
    eddy, become alone--on top of Kuyawa." The same words are then
    repeated, substituting for Kuyawa the two other above-mentioned
    spots, one after the other, and thus retracing the flight of
    Na'ukuwakula.

    Then the magician returns to the beginning and recites the
    spell over again up to the phrase: "bind thy skirt together and
    fly," which is followed this time by a second tapwana: "I shall
    outdistance all my comrades with the bottom of my canoe; I shall
    out-distance all my comrades with the prow-board of my canoe,
    etc., etc.," repeating the prophetic boast with all the parts of
    the canoe, as is usual in the middle part of magical spells.

    In the dogina, the last part, the magician addresses the waga
    in mythological terms, with allusions to the Kudayuri myth, and
    adds: "Canoe thou art a ghost, thou art like a wind eddy; vanish,
    O my canoe, fly; break through your sea-passage of Kadimwatu,
    cleave through the promontory of Saramwa, pass through Loma;
    die away, disappear, vanish with an eddy, vanish with the mist;
    make your imprint in the sand, cut through the seaweed, go,
    put on your wreath of aromatic herbs." [51]


After the wayugo has been ritually brought in, the lashing of the
canoe begins. First of all the ribs are lashed into position then
the planks, and with this the body of the canoe is ready. This
takes a varying time, according to the number of people at work,
and to the amount of tallying and adjusting to be done at the final
fitting. Sometimes one whole day's work is spent on this stage,
and the next piece of work, the construction of the outrigger, has
to be postponed to another day. This is the next stage, and there is
no magic to punctuate the course of technical activities. The big,
solid log is put alongside the canoe, and a number of short, pointed
sticks are driven into it. The sticks are put in crossways on the top
of the float (lamina). Then the tops of these sticks are again attached
to a number of horizontal poles, which have to be thrust through one
side of the canoe-body, and attached to the other. All this naturally
requires again adjusting and fitting. When these sticks and poles are
bound together, there results a strong yet elastic frame, in which
the canoe and the float are held together in parallel positions,
and across them transversely there run the several horizontal poles
which keep them together. Next, these poles are bridged over by many
longitudinal sticks lashed together, and thus a platform is made
between the edge of the canoe and the tops of the float sticks.

When that is done, the whole frame of the canoe is ready, and there
remains only to caulk the holes and interstices. The caulking substance
is prepared in the hut of the toliwaga, and a spell is recited over
it on the evening before the work is begun. Then again, the whole
community turn out and do the work in one day's sitting.

The canoe is now ready for the sea, except for the painting, Which is
only for ornamentation. Three more magical rites have to be performed,
however, before it is painted and then launched. All three refer
directly to the canoe, and aim at giving it speed. At the same time all
three are exorcisms against evil influences, resulting from various
defilements or broken taboos, which possibly might have desecrated
the waga. The first is called Vakasulu, which means something like
"ritual cooking" of the canoe. The toliwaga has to prepare a real
witches' cauldron of all sorts of things, which afterwards are burnt
under the bottom of the canoe, and the smoke is supposed to exercise a
speed-giving and cleansing influence. The ingredients are: the wings
of a bat, the nest of a very small bird called posisiku, some dried
bracken leaves, a bit of cotton fluff, and some lalang grass. All
the substances are associated with flying and lightness. The wood
used for kindling the fire is that of the light-timbered mimosa tree
(liga). The twigs have to be obtained by throwing at the tree a
piece of wood (never a stone), and when the broken-off twig falls,
it must be caught in the hand, and not allowed to touch the ground.

The second rite, called Vaguri, is an exorcism only, and it consists
of charming a stick, and then knocking the body of the canoe all
over with it. This expels the evil witchery (bulubwalata), which
it is only wise to suspect has been cast by some envious rivals,
or persons jealous of the toliwaga.

Finally, the third of these rites, the Kaytapena waga, consists
in medicating a torch of coco-leaf with the appropriate spell, and
fumigating with it the inside of the canoe. This gives speed and once
more cleanses the canoe.

After another sitting of a few days, the whole outside of the canoe
is painted in three colours. Over each of them a special spell is
chanted again, the most important one over the black colour. This
is never omitted, while the red and white spells are optional. In
the rite of the black colour, again, a whole mixture of substances
is used--a dry bracken leaf, grass, and a posisiku nest--all this
is charred with some coco-nut husk, and the first strokes of the
black paint are made with the mixture. The rest is painted with a
watery mixture of charred coco-nut. For red colour, a sort of ochre,
imported from the d'Entrecasteaux Islands, is used; the white one is
made of a chalky earth, found in certain parts of the sea shore.

Sail-making is done on another day, usually in the village, by
communal labour, and, with a number of people helping, the tedious
and complicated work is performed in a relatively short time. The
triangular outline of the sail is first pegged out on the ground,
as a rule the old sail being used as a pattern. After this is done,
tapes of dried pandanus leaf (see Plates XXVIII, XXIX) are stretched
on the ground and first fixed along the borders of the sail. Then,
starting at the apex of the triangle, the sail-makers put tapes
radiating towards the base, sewing them together with awls of flying
fox bone, and using as thread narrow strips of specially toughened
pandanus leaf. Two layers of tapes are sewn one on top of the other
to make a solid fabric.




IV

The canoe is now quite ready to be launched. But before we go on to an
account of the ceremonial launching and the associated festivities,
one or two general remarks must be made retrospectively about the
proceedings just described.

The whole of the first stage of canoe-building, that is, the cutting
of the tree, the scooping out of the log, and the preparation of the
other component parts, with all their associated magic, is done only
when a new canoe is built.

But the second stage has to be performed over all the canoes before
every great overseas Kula expedition. On such an occasion, all
the canoes have to be re-lashed, re-caulked, and re-painted. This
obviously requires that they should all be taken to pieces and then
lashed, caulked and painted exactly as is done with a new canoe. All
the magic incidental to these three processes is then performed, in
its due order, over the renovated canoe. So that we can say about the
second stage of canoe-building that not only is it always performed
in association with the Kula, but that no big expedition ever takes
place without it.

We have had a description of the magical rites, and the ideas which are
implied in every one of them have been specified. But there are one or
two more general characteristics which must be mentioned here. First,
there is what could be called the "ceremonial dimension" of magical
rites. That is, how far is the performance of the rite attended by
the members of the community, if at all; and if so, do they actively
take part in it, or do they simply pay keen attention and behave as
an interested audience; or, though being present, do they pay little
heed and show only small interest?

In the first stage of canoe-building, the rites are performed by the
magician himself, with only a few helpers in attendance. The general
village public do not feel sufficiently interested and attracted to
assist, nor are they bound by custom to do so. The general character
of these rites is more like the performance of a technicality of work
than of a ceremony. The preparing of herbs for the ligogu magic, for
instance, and the charming it over, is carried out in a matter-of-fact,
businesslike manner, and nothing in the behaviour of the magician
and those casually grouped around him would indicate that anything
specially interesting in the routine work is happening.

The rites of the second stage are ipso facto attended by all those who
help in piecing together and lashing, but on the whole those present
have no special task assigned to them in the performance of these
rites. As to the attention and behaviour during the performance of the
magic, much depends of course on whether the magician officiating is
a chief of great importance or someone of low rank. A certain decorum
and even silence would be observed in any case. But many of those
present would turn aside and go away, if they wanted to do so. The
magician does not produce the impression of an officiating high priest
performing a solemn ceremony, but rather of a specialised workman
doing a particularly important piece of work. It must be remembered
that all the rites are simple, and the chanting of the spells in
public is done in a low voice, and quickly, without any specially
effective vocal production. Again, the caulking and the wayugo rites
are, in some types of magic at least, performed in the magician's hut,
without any attendance whatever, and so is that of the black paint.

The great event which was the cause of the building and renovating of the canoes, was a Kula expedition planned by To’ulawa and his Kula community. They were to go to the East, to Kitava, to Iwa or Gawa, perhaps even to Muruwa (Woodlark Island), though with this island the natives do not carry on the Kula directly. As is usual in such cases, months before the approximate date of sailing, plans and forecasts were made, stories of previous voyages were recounted, old men dwelt on their own reminiscences and reported what they had been told by their elders of the days when iron was unknown and everyone had to sail to the East in order to get the green stone quarried in Suloga on Woodlark Island. And so, as it always happens when future events are talked over round village fires, imagination outran all bounds of probability; and the hopes and anticipations grew bigger and bigger. In [149]the end, everyone really believed his party would go at least to the Easternmost Marshall Bennetts (Gawa), whereas, as events turned out, they did not sail beyond Kitava.

For this occasion a new canoe had to be constructed in Kasana’i, and this was done by Ibena himself, the chief of that village, a man of rank equal to the highest chief (his kinsman, in fact) but of smaller power. Ibena is a skilled builder as well as a fair carver, and there is no class of magic in which he does not profess to be versed. The canoe was built, under his guidance; he carved the boards himself, he also performed the magic, and he was, of course, the toliwaga.

In Omarakana, the canoe had to be slightly altered in construction; it had to be re-lashed and re-painted. To do this To’uluwa, the chief, had summoned a master builder and carver from the island of Kitava, the same one who a couple of years before, had built this canoe. Also a new sail had to be made for the Omarakana boat, as the old one was too small. The ceremony of tasasoria (launching and regatta) ought by rights to have been held on the beach of Kasana’i, but as its sister village, Omarakana, is so much more important, it took place on Kaulukuba, the sea-shore of the latter.

As the date approached, the whole district was alive with preparations, since the coastal villages had to put their canoes in order, while in the inland communities, new festive dresses and food had to be made ready. The food was not to be eaten, but to be offered to the chief for his sagali (ceremonial distribution). Only in Omarakana, the women had to cook for a big festive repast to be eaten on return from the tasasoria. In the Trobriands it is always a sign that a festive event is pending when all the women go in the evening to the bush to collect plenty of firewood. Next morning, this will be used for the kumkumuli, the baking of food in the ground, which is one of the forms of cooking used on festive occasions. On the evening of the tasasoria ceremony, people in Omarakana and Kasana’i were also busy with the numerous other preparations, running to the shore and back, filling baskets with yams for the sagali, getting ready their festive dress and decorations for the morrow. Festive dress means, for a woman, a new grass skirt, resplendent in fresh red, white and purple, and for the man a newly bleached, snow-white pubic leaf, made of the stalk of areca palm leaf.[150]

Early in the morning of the appointed day, the food was packed into baskets of plaited leaf, the personal apparel on top of it, all covered as usual with folded mats and conveyed to the beach. The women carried on their heads the large baskets, shaped like big inverted bells, the men shouldered a stick with two bag-shaped baskets at each end. Other men had to carry the oars, paddles, rigging and sail, as these paraphernalia are always kept in the village. From one of the villages, one of the large, prismatic receptacles for food made of sticks was carried by several men right over the raybwag (coral ridge) to be offered to the chief of Omarakana as a share in the sagali. The whole village was astir, and on its outskirts, through the surrounding groves, parties from inland could be seen making their way rapidly to the shore. I left the village with a party of notables at about eight o’clock in the morning. After leaving the grove of fruit and palm trees which grows especially densely around the village of Omarakana, we entered between the two walls of green, the usual monotonous Trobriand road, which passes through the low scrub. Soon, emerging on a garden space, we could see, beyond a gentle declivity, the rising slope of the raybwag, a mixture of rank vegetation with monumental boulders of grey coral standing out here and there. Through this, the path led on, following in an intricate course between small precipices and towering outcrops, passing huge, ancient ficus trees, spreading around them their many trunks and aerial roots. At the top of the ridge, all of a sudden the blue sea shone through the foliage, and the roar of waves breaking on the reef struck our ears. Soon we found ourselves among the crowd assembled on the beach, near to the big boat-shed of Omarakana.

By about nine o’clock, everybody was ready on the beach. It was fully exposed to the Eastern sun, but this was not yet sufficiently high to drop its light right from above, and thus to produce that deadly effect of tropical mid-day, where the shadows instead of modelling out the details, blur every vertical surface and make everything dull and formless. The beach appeared bright and gaudy, and the lively brown bodies looked well against the background of green foliage and white sand. The natives were anointed with coco-nut oil, and decorated with flowers and facial paint. Large red hibiscus blossoms were stuck into their hair, and wreaths of the white, [151]wonderfully scented butia flowers crowned the dense black mops. There was a good display of ebony carvings, sticks and lime spoons. There were decorated lime pots, and such objects of personal adornment as belts of red shell discs or of small cowrie shells, nose sticks (very rarely used nowadays), and other articles so well known to everybody from ethnological collections in museums, and usually called “ceremonial,” though, as said above (Chapter III, Div. III) the description “objects of parade” would be much more in agreement with the correct meaning of the words.

Such popular festivities as the one just being described are the occasions on which these objects of parade, some of which astonish us by their artistic perfection, appear in native life. Before I had opportunities to see savage art in actual display, in its proper, “living” setting, there seemed to me always to exist some incongruity between the artistic finish of such objects and the general crudity of savage life, a crudity marked precisely on the æsthetic side. One imagines greasy, dirty, naked bodies, moppy hair full of vermin, and other realistic features which make up one’s idea of the “savage,” and in some respects reality bears out imagination. As a matter of fact though, the incongruity does not exist when once one has seen native art actually displayed in its own setting. A festive mob of natives, with the wonderful golden-brown colour of their skins brought out by washing and anointing and set off by the gaudy white, red and black of facial paint, feathers and ornaments, with their exquisitely carved and polished ebony objects, with their finely worked lime pots, has a distinct elegance of its own, without striking one as grotesque or incongruous in any æsthetic detail. There is an evident harmony between their festive mood, the display of colours and forms, and the manner in which they put on and bear their ornaments.

Those who have come from a distance, and who would spoil their decorations by the long march, wash with water and anoint themselves with coco-nut grease immediately before arriving at the scene of festivities. As a rule the best paint is put on later on, when the climax of the proceedings approaches. On this occasion, after the preliminaries (distribution of food, arrival of other canoes) were over, and when the races were just going to be started, the aristocracy of Omarakana—the [152]wives and children of To’uluwa, his relatives and himself—withdrew behind the shelters, near the boat shed, and proceeded to put on the red, white and black of full facial paint. They crushed young betel-nut, mixed it with lime, and put it on with the pestles of betel mortars; then some of the aromatic black resin (sayaku) and white lime were applied. As the habit of mirrors is not quite well established yet in the Trobriands, the painting was done by one person on the face of another, and great care and patience were displayed on both sides.

The numerous crowd spent the day without taking much refreshment—a feature strongly differentiating Kiriwinian festivities from our ideal of an entertainment or picnic. No cooking was done, and only a few bananas were eaten here and there, and green coco-nuts were drunk and eaten. But even these refreshments were consumed with great frugality.

As always on such occasions, the people collected together in sets, the visitors from each village forming a group apart. The local natives kept to their own boat houses, those of Omarakana and Kurokaiwa having their natural centres on the beach of Kaulukuba. The other visitors similarly kept together in their position on the beach, according to their local distribution; thus, men from the Northern villages would keep to the Northern section of the beach, those from the South would stick to that point of the compass, so that villages which were neighbours in reality would also be side by side on the shore. There was no mingling in the crowd, and individuals would not walk about from one group to another. The aristocrats, out of personal dignity, humble folk because of a modesty imposed by custom, would keep in their places. To’uluwa sat practically still during the whole performance, on the platform erected for this purpose, except when he went over to his boat, to trim it for the race.

The boat shed of Omarakana, round which the chief, his family and the other villagers were grouped, was the centre of all the proceedings. Under one of the palms, a fairly high platform was put up to accommodate To’uluwa. In a row in front of the sheds and shelters, there stood the prismatic food receptacles (pwata’i). They had been erected by the inhabitants of Omarakana and Kasana’i, on the previous day, and partially filled with yams. The rest had to be supplied [153]by people from the other villages, on the day of the boat races. As the natives came to the beach on that day, village after village, they brought their contribution, and before settling down on their particular spot on the shore, they paid a visit to the chief and offered him their tributes. These would be put into one of the pwata’i. All the villages did not contribute their share, but the majority did, though some of them brought only a few baskets. One of the villages brought one complete pwata’i, filled with yams, and offered the whole to the chief.

In the meantime, the eight canoes arrived, including that of Kasana’i, which had been ceremonially launched that morning with the accompanying magical rite, on its own beach about half a mile away. The canoe of Omarakana had also been launched on this morning (Plate XXX), and the same rite performed over it. It ought to have been done by To’uluwa, the chief. As he, however, is quite incapable of remembering magical spells—in fact, he never does any of the magic which his rank and office impose on him—the rite was performed on this occasion by one of his kinsmen. This is a typical case of a rule very stringently formulated by all informants when you ask about it, yet in reality often observed with laxity. If you inquire directly, everyone will tell you that this rite, as all others of the mwasila (Kula magic) has to be done by the toliwaga. But every time when he ought to perform it, To’uluwa will find some excuse, and delegate it to another.

When all the canoes were present, as well as all the important villages, at about eleven o’clock a.m., there took place the sagali (ceremonial distribution). The food was given to people from various villages, especially such as took part in the races, or had assisted in the building of the new canoe. So we see that food contributed by all the villages before the sagali was simply redistributed among them, a considerable quantity having been added first by the chief; and this indeed is the usual procedure at a sagali. In this case, of course, the lion’s share was taken by the Kitavans who helped at the building.

After the sagali was over, the canoes were all brought up to one spot, and the natives began to prepare them for the race. The masts were stepped, the fastenings trimmed, the sails made ready (see Plate XXXI). After that the canoes [154]all put off and gathered about half a mile off the shore, beyond the fringing reef; and at a sign given by some one on one of them, they all started. As said before, such a run is not a race properly speaking, in which the canoes would start scrupulously at the same minute, have the same distance to cover, and which would clearly show which is the fastest. In this case, it was merely, as always, a review of the boats sailing along as well as they were able, a review in which they all began to move, more or less at the same time, went in the same direction, and covered practically the same distance.

As to the time table of the events, the sagali was over before mid-day. There was a pause; and then, at about one p.m., the natives began rigging the canoes. Then all hands had a spell, and not before three p.m. were the races started. The whole affair was over by about four o’clock, and half an hour later, the boats from the other villages started to sail home, the people on the shore dispersed, so that by sunset, that is, about six o’clock, the beach was almost deserted.

Such was the tasasoria ceremony which I saw in February, 1916. It was a fine sight from the spectacular point of view. A superficial onlooker could have hardly perceived any sign of white man’s influence or interference. I was the only white man present, and besides myself only some two or three native missionary teachers were dressed in white cotton. Amongst the rest of us there could be seen sparsely a coloured rag, tied round as a neckerchief or head-dress. But otherwise there was only a swarm of naked brown bodies, shining with coco-nut oil, adorned in new festive dress, with here and there the three-coloured grass skirt of a woman (see Plates XXX and XXXI).

But alas, for one who could look below the surface and read the various symptoms of decay, deep changes would be discernible from what must have been the original conditions of such a native gathering. In fact, some three generations ago, even its appearances would have been different. The natives then would have been armed with shields and spears; some would have borne decorative weapons, such as the big sword-clubs of hard wood, or massive ebony cudgels, or small throwing-sticks. A closer inspection would have shown many more decorations and ornaments, such as nose-sticks, finely carved lime spatulæ, gourds with burnt-in designs, some of [155]which are now out of use, or those used of inferior workmanship or without decoration.

But other and much deeper changes have taken place in the social conditions. Three generations ago both the canoes in the water and the people on the shore would have been more numerous. As mentioned above, in the olden days there would have been some twenty canoes in Kiriwina, as against eight at the present time. Again, the far stronger influence of the chief, and the much greater relative importance of the event would have attracted a larger proportion out of the then more numerous population. Nowadays, other interests, such as diving for pearls, working on white man’s plantations, divert the native attention, while many events connected with Missions, Government and trading, eclipse the importance of old customs.

Again, the people on the shore would have had to adhere in olden days even more closely to the local distribution, men of the same village community keeping together still more strictly, and looking with mistrust and perhaps even hostility, at other groups, especially those with whom they had hereditary feuds. The general tension would often be broken by squabbles or even miniature fights, especially at the moment of dispersing, and on the way home.

One of the important features of the performance, and the one of which the natives think perhaps most—the display of food—would also have been quite different. The chief whom I saw sitting on a platform surrounded by a few wives only, and with small attendance would, under the old conditions, have been the owner of thrice as many wives and consequently relatives-in-law, and as it is these from whom he derives most of his income, he would have provided a much bigger sagali than he is able to do nowadays.

Three generations ago the whole event would have been much more solemn and dramatic to the natives. The very distance to the neighbouring island of Kitava is nowadays dwarfed. In the past, it would not, as now, be quickly obliterated by a white man’s steam-launch. Then, the canoes on the beach were the only means of arriving there, and their value in the eyes of the natives must have, therefore, been even higher, although they think so much of them now. The outlines of the distant island and the small fleet of canoes on [156]the beach formed for the natives the first act of a big over seas expedition, an event of far deeper significance to them then than now. A rich haul of arm-shells, the arrival of many much-coveted utilities, the bringing back of news from the far-off land, all this meant much more in older days than it can mean at present. War, dancing, and the Kula supplied tribal life with its romantic and heroic elements. Nowadays, with war prohibited by the Government, with dancing discredited by missionary influence, the Kula alone remains, and even that is stripped of some of its glamour.

[Contents]
II
Before we proceed to the next stage, we must pause in following the events of a Kula expedition, and consider one or two points of more general importance. I have touched in the narrative, but not dwelt upon, certain problems of the sociology of work. At the outset of the preceding chapter it was mentioned that canoe-building requires a definite organisation of work, and in fact we saw that in the course of construction, various kinds of labour were employed, and more especially towards the end, much use was made of communal labour. Again, we saw that during the launching ceremony payment was given by the owner to the expert and his helpers. These two points therefore, the organisation of labour and communal labour in particular, and the system of payment for experts’ work must be here developed.

Organisation of Labour.—First of all, it is important to realise that a Kiriwinian is capable of working well, efficiently and in a continuous manner. But he must work under an effective incentive: he must be prompted by some duty imposed by tribal standards, or he must be lured by ambitions and values also dictated by custom and tradition. Gain, such as is often the stimulus for work in more civilised communities, never acts as an impulse to work under the original native conditions. It succeeds very badly, therefore, when a white man tries to use this incentive to make a native work.

This is the reason why the traditional view of the lazy and indolent native is not only a constant refrain of the average white settler, but finds its way into good books of travel, and even serious ethnographic records. With us, labour is, or was till fairly recently, a commodity sold as any other, in the [157]open market. A man accustomed to think in terms of current economic theory will naturally apply the conceptions of supply and demand to labour, and he applies them therefore to native labour. The untrained person does the same, though in less sophisticated terms, and as they see that the native will not work well for the white man, even if tempted by considerable payment and treated fairly well, they conclude that his capacity for labour is very small. This error is due to the same cause which lies at the bottom of all our misconceptions about people of different cultures. If you remove a man from his social milieu, you eo ipso deprive him of almost all his stimuli to moral steadfastness and economic efficiency and even of interest in life. If then you measure him by moral, legal or economic standards, also essentially foreign to him, you cannot but obtain a caricature in your estimate.

But the natives are not only capable of energetic, continuous and skilful work; their social conditions also make it possible for them to employ organised labour. At the beginning of Chapter IV, the sociology of canoe-building was given in outline, and now, after the details of its successive stages have been filled in, it is possible to confirm what has been said there, and draw some conclusions as to this organisation of labour. And first, as we are using this expression so often, I must insist again on the fact that the natives are capable of it, and that this contention is not a truism, as the following considerations should show. The just mentioned view of the lazy, individualistic and selfish savage, who lives on the bounties of nature as they fall ripe and ready for him, implicitly precludes the possibility of his doing effective work, integrated into an organised effort by social forces. Again, the view, almost universally accepted by specialists, is that the lowest savages are in the pre-economic stage of individualistic search for food, whereas the more developed ones, such as the Trobrianders, for instance, live at the stage of isolated household economy. This view also ignores, when it does not deny explicitly, the possibility of socially organised labour.

The view generally held is that, in native communities each individual works for himself, or members of a household work so as to provide each family with the necessities of life. Of course, a canoe, even a masawa, could obviously be made by the members of a household, though with less efficiency [158]and in a longer time. So that there is a priori nothing to foretell whether organised labour, or the unaided efforts of an individual or a small group of people should be used in the work. As a matter of fact, we have seen in canoe-building a number of men engaged in performing each a definite and difficult task, though united to one purpose. The tasks were differentiated in their sociological setting; some of the workers were actually to own the canoe; others belonged to a different community, and did it only as an act of service to the chief. Some worked in order to derive direct benefit from the use of the canoe, others were to be paid. We saw also that the work of felling, of scooping, of decorating, would in some cases be performed by various men, or it might be performed by one only. Certainly the minute tasks of lashing, caulking and painting, as well as sail-making, were done by communal labour as opposed to individual. And all these different tasks were directed towards one aim: the providing the chief or headman with the title of ownership of a canoe, and his whole community with its use.

It is clear that this differentiation of tasks, co-ordinated to a general purpose, requires a well developed social apparatus to back it up, and that on the other hand, this social mechanism must be associated and permeated with economic elements. There must be a chief, regarded as representative of a group; he must have certain formal rights and privileges, and a certain amount of authority, and also he must dispose of part of the wealth of the community. There must also be a man or men with knowledge sufficient to direct and co-ordinate the technical operations. All this is obvious. But it must be clearly set forth that the real force which binds all the people and ties them down in their tasks is obedience to custom, to tradition.

Every man knows what is expected from him, in virtue of his position, and he does it, whether it means the obtaining of a privilege, the performance of a task, or the acquiescence in a status quo. He knows that it always has been thus, and thus it is all around him, and thus it always must remain. The chief’s authority, his privileges, the customary give and take which exist between him and the community, all that is merely, so to speak, the mechanism through which the force of tradition acts. For there is no organised physical means [159]by which those in authority could enforce their will in a case like this. Order is kept by direct force of everybody’s adhesion to custom, rules and laws, by the same psychological influences which in our society prevent a man of the world doing something which is not “the right thing.” The expression “might is right” would certainly not apply to Trobriand society. “Tradition is right, and what is right has might”—this rather is the rule governing the social forces in Boyowa, and I dare say in almost all native communities at this stage of culture.

All the details of custom, all the magical formulæ, the whole fringe of ceremonial and rite which accompany canoe-building, all these things add weight to the social scheme of duties. The importance of magical ideas and rites as integrating forces has been indicated at the outset of this description. It is easy to see how all the appurtenances of ceremony, that is, magic, decoration, and public attendance welded together into one whole with labour, serve to put order and organisation into it.

Another point must be enlarged upon somewhat more. I have spoken of organised labour, and of communal labour. These two conceptions are not synonymous, and it is well to keep them apart. As already defined, organised labour implies the co-operation of several socially and economically different elements. It is quite another thing, however, when a number of people are engaged side by side, performing the same work, without any technical division of labour, or social differentiation of function. Thus, the whole enterprise of canoe-building is, in Kiriwina, the result of organised labour. But the work of some twenty to thirty men, who side by side do the lashing or caulking of the canoe, is communal labour. This latter form of work has a great psychological advantage. It is much more stimulating and more interesting, and it allows of emulation, and therefore of a better quality of work. For one or two men, it would require about a month to do the work which twenty to thirty men can do in a day. In certain cases, as in the pulling of the heavy log from the jungle to the village, the joining of forces is almost indispensable. True, the canoe could be scooped out in the raybwag, and then a few men might be able to pull it along, applying some skill. But it would entail great hardships. Thus, in some cases, [160]communal labour is of extreme importance, and in all casesit furthers the course of work considerably. Sociologically, it is important, because it implies mutual help, exchange of services, and solidarity in work within a wide range.

Communal labour is an important factor in the tribal economy of the Trobriand natives. They resort to it in the building of living-huts and storehouses, in certain forms of industrial work, and in the transport of things, especially at harvest time, when great quantities of produce have to be shifted from one village to another, often over a great distance. In fishing, when several canoes go out together and fish each for itself, then we cannot speak of communal labour. When on the other hand, they fish in one band, each canoe having an appointed task, as is sometimes done, then we have to do with organised labour. Communal labour is also based upon the duties of urigubu, or relatives-in-law. That is, a man’s relatives-in-law have to assist him, whenever he needs their co-operation. In the case of a chief, there is an assistance on a grand scale, and whole villages will turn out. In the case of a commoner, only a few people will help. There is always a distribution of food after the work has been done, but this can hardly be considered as payment, for is is not proportional to the work each individual does.

By far the most important part communal labour has to play, is in gardening. There are as many as five different forms of communal labour in the gardens, each called by a different name, and each distinct in its sociological nature. When a chief or headman summons the members of a village community, and they agree to do their gardens communally, it is called tamgogula. When this is decided upon, and the time grows near for cutting the scrub for new gardens, a festive eating is held on the central place, and there all men go, and takayva (cut down) the scrub on the chief’s plot. After that, they cut in turn the garden plots of everyone, all men working on the one plot during a day, and getting on that day food from the owner. This procedure is reproduced at each successive stage of gardening; at the fencing, planting of yams, bringing in supports, and finally, at the weeding, which is done by women. At certain stages, the gardening is often done by each one working for himself, namely at the clearing of the gardens after they are burnt, at the cleaning of the roots [161]of yams when they begin to produce tubers, and at harvesting.

There are, as a rule, several communal feasts during the progress, and one at the end of a tamgogula period. Gardens are generally worked in this fashion, in years when big ceremonial dancing or some other tribal festivity is held. This usually makes the work very late, and it has then to be done quickly and energetically, and communal labour has evidently been found suitable for this purpose.

When several villages agree to work their gardens by communal labour, this is called lubalabisa. The two forms do not differ very much except by name, and also by the fact that, in the latter form, more than one chief or headman has to direct the process. The lubalabisa would only be held when there are several small villages, clustered together, as is the case in the village compounds of Sinaketa, Kavataria, Kabwaku or Yalaka.

When a chief or headman, or man of wealth and influence summons his dependents or his relatives-in-law to work for him, the name kabutu is given to the proceedings. The owner has to give food to all those co-operating. A kabutu may be instituted for one bit of gardening, for example, a headman may invite his villagers to do his cutting for him, or his planting or his fencing. It is clear that whenever communal labour is required by one man in the construction of his house or yam store, the labour is of the kabutu type, and it is thus called by the natives.

The fourth form of communal labour is called ta’ula, and takes place whenever a number of villagers agree to do one stage of gardening in common, on the basis of reciprocity. No great or special payments take place. The same sort of communal labour extending over all stages of gardening, is called kari’ula, and it may be counted as the fifth form of communal labour in the gardens. Finally, a special word, tavile’i, is used when they wish to say that the gardens are done by individual labour, and that everyone works on his own plot. It is a rule, however, that the chief’s plots, especially those of an influential chief of high rank, are always gardened by communal labour, and this latter is also used with regard to certain privileged plots, on which, in a given year, the garden magic is performed first, and with the greatest display.[162]

Thus there is a number of distinct forms of communal labour, and they show many more interesting features which cannot be mentioned in this short outline. The communal labour used in canoe-building is obviously of the kabutu type. In having a canoe made, the chief is able to summon big numbers of the inhabitants of a whole district, the headman of an important village receives the assistance of his whole community, whereas a man of small importance, such as one of the smaller headmen of Sinaketa or Vakuta, would have to rely on his fellow villagers and relations-in-law. In all these cases, it would be the call of duty, laid down by custom, which would make them work. The payment would be of secondary importance, though in certain circumstances, it would be a considerable one. The distribution of food during launching forms such a payment, as we have seen in Division I of this chapter. In olden days, a meal of Pigs, an abundance of betel-nut and coco-nut and sugar cane would have made a veritable feast for the natives.

Another point of importance from the economic aspect is the payment given by the chief to the builder of the canoe. The canoe of Omarakana was made, as we saw, for To’uluwa by a specialist from Kitava, who was well paid with a quantity of food, pigs and vaygua (native valuables). Nowadays, when the power of the chiefs is broken, when they have much less wealth than formerly to back up their position, and cannot use even the little force they ever did and when the general breaking up of custom has undermined the traditional deference and loyalty of their subjects, the production of canoes and other forms of wealth by the specialist for the chief is only a vestige of what it once was. In olden days it was, economically, one of the most important features of the Trobriand tribal life. In the construction of the canoe, Which a chief in olden days would never build himself, we meet with an example of this.

Here it will be enough to say that whenever a canoe is built for a chief or headman by a builder, this has to be paid for by an initial gift of food. Then, as long as the man is at work, provisional gifts of food are given him. If he lives away from home, like the Kitavan builder on the beach of Omarakana, he is fed by the toliwaga and supplied with dainties such as coco-nut, betel-nut, pigs’ flesh, fish and fruits. When he works [163]in his own home, the toliwaga will bring him choice food at frequent intervals, inspecting, as he does so, the progress of the work. This feeding of the worker or bringing him extra choice food is called vakapula. After the canoe is finished, a substantial gift is given to the master-builder during the ceremonial distribution of food. The proper amount would be a few hundred basketfuls of yams, a pig or two, bunches of betel-nut, and a great number of coco-nuts; also, a large stone blade or a pig, or a belt of red shell discs, and some smaller vaygua of the non-Kula type.

In Vakuta, where chieftainship is not very distinct, and the difference in wealth less great, a toliwaga also has to feed the workers during the time of hollowing out, preparing, and building a canoe. Then, after the caulking, some fifty basketfuls are given to the builder. After the launching and trial run, this builder gives a rope, symbol of the canoe, to his wife, who, blowing the conch shell, presents the rope to the toliwaga. He, on the spot, gives her a bunch of betel or bananas. Next day, a considerable present of food, known as yomelu, is given by the chief, and then at the next harvest, another fifty or sixty basketfuls of yams as karibudaboda or closing up gift.

I have chosen the data from two concrete cases, one noted in Kiriwina, the other in Vakuta—that is, in the district where the chief’s power is greatest, and in that where there never has been more than a rudimentary distance in rank and wealth between chief and commoner. In both cases there is a payment, but in Kiriwina the payment is greater. In Vakuta, it is obviously rather an exchange of services, whereas in Kiriwina the chief maintains, as well as rewards his builder. In both cases we have the exchange of skilled services against maintenance by supply of food.

[Contents]
III
We shall pass now to the next ceremonial and customary performance in the succession of Kula events, to the display of a new canoe to the friends and relatives of the toliwaga. This custom is called kabigidoya. The tasasoria (launching and trial run) is obviously at the same time the last act of ship-building, and by its associated magical rite, by the foretaste of sailing, it is also one of the beginning stages of the Kula. The kabigidoya being a presentation of the new canoe, belongs [164]to the series of building ceremonials; but in so far as it is a provisioning trip, it belongs to the Kula.

The canoe is manned with the usual crew, it is rigged and fitted out with all its paraphernalia, such as paddles, baler, and conch shell, and it sets out on a short trip to the beaches of the neighbouring villages. When the canoe belongs to a compound settlement like Sinaketa, then it will stop at every beach of the sister villages. The conch shell is blown, and people in the village will know “The kabigidoya men have arrived.” The crew remains in the canoe, the toliwaga goes ashore, taking one paddle with him. He goes to the house of his fellow-headman, and thrusts the paddle into the frame of the house, with the words: “I offer thee thy bisila (pandanus streamer); take a vaygua (valuable), catch a pig and break the head of my new canoe.” To which the local headman will answer—giving a present: “This is the katuvisala dabala (the breaking of the head) of thy new canoe!” This is an example of the quaint, customary wording used in the exchange of gifts, and in other ceremonial transactions. The bisila (pandanus streamer) is often used as a symbol for the canoe, in magical spells, in customary expressions, and in idiomatic terms of speech. Bleached pandanus streamers are tied to the mast, rigging and sail; a specially medicated strip is often attached to the prow of the canoe to give it speed, and there is also other bisila magic to make a district partner inclined for Kula.

The gifts given are not always up to the standard of those mentioned in the above customary phrase. The kabigidoya, especially from the neighbouring villages, often brings only a few mats, a few dozen coco-nuts, some betel-nut, a couple of paddles, and such articles of minor value. And even in these trifles there is not much gain from the short kabigidoya. For as we know, at the beginning of the Kula all the canoes of, say, Sinaketa or Kiriwina are either rebuilt or renewed. What therefore one canoe receives on its kabigidoya round, from all the others, will have to be more or less returned to them, when they in their turn kabigidoya one after the other. Soon afterwards, however, on an appointed day, all the canoes sail together on a visit to the other districts, and on this kabigidoya, they receive as a rule much more substantial presents, and these they will only have to return much later, after a year or two, when the visited district will come back to them on their [165]own kabigidoya. Thus, when the canoes of Kirwina are built and renovated for a big Kula expedition, they will sail South along the coast, and stop first in Olivilevi, receiving presents from the chief there, and walking on a round of the inland villages of Luba. Then they will proceed to the next sea village, that of Wawela, leaving their canoes there, and going from there across to Sinaketa. Thence they proceed still further South, to Vakuta. The villages on the Lagoon, such as Sinaketa and Vakuta, will return these visits, sailing North along the Western shore on the Lagoon side. Then they stop at Tukwaukwa or Kavataria, and from there walk inland to Kiriwina, where they receive presents (see Map IV, p. 50).

The kabigidoya trips of the Vakutans and Sinaketans are more important than those of the Northern or Eastern districts, because they are combined with a preliminary trade, in which the visitors replenish their stock of goods, which they will need presently on their trip South to Dobu. The reader will remember that Kuboma is the industrial district of the Trobriands, where are manufactured most of the useful articles, for which these islands are renowned in the whole of Eastern New Guinea. It lies in the Northern half of the island, and from Kiriwina it is only a few miles walk, but to reach it from Sinaketa or Vakuta it is necessary to sail North. The Southern villages therefore go to Kavataria, and from there walk inland to Bwoytalu, Luya, Yalaka and Kadukwaykela, where they make their purchases. The inhabitants of these villages also when they hear that the Sinaketans are anchored in Kavataria, bring their wares to the canoes.

A brisk trade is carried on during the day or two that the Sinaketans remain in Kavataria. The natives of Kuboma are always eager to buy yams, as they live in an unfertile district, and devote themselves more to industrial productions than to gardening. And they are still more eager to acquire coco-nuts and betel-nut, of which they have a great scarcity. They desire besides to receive in exchange for their produce the red shell discs manufactured in Sinaketa and Vakuta, and the turtle-shell rings. For objects of great value, the Sinaketans would give the big clay pots which they receive directly from the Amphletts. For that they obtain different articles according to the villages with which they are exchanging. From Bwoytalu, they get the wonderfully fashioned and [166]decorated wooden dishes of various sizes, depths and finish, made out of either hard or soft wood; from Bwaytelu, Wabutuma and Buduwaylaka, armlets of plaited fern fibre, and wooden combs; from Buduwaylaka, Yalaka, and Kadukwaykela, lime pots of different qualities and sizes. From the villages of Tilataula, the district North-east of Kuboma, the polished axe blades used to be acquired in olden days.

I shall not enter into the technicalities of this exchange, nor shall I give here the approximate list of prices which obtain. We shall have to follow the traded goods further on to Dobu, and there we shall see how they change hands again, and under what conditions. This will allow us to compare the prices and thus to gauge the nature of the transaction as a whole. It will be better therefore to defer all details till then.

[Contents]
IV
Here, however, its seems necessary to make another digression from the straight narrative of the Kula, and give an outline of the various forms of trade and exchange as we find them in the Trobriands. Indeed, the main theme of this volume is the Kula, a form of exchange, and I would be untrue to my chief principle of method, were I to give the description of one form of exchange torn out of its most intimate context; that is, were I to give an account of the Kula without giving at least a general outline of the forms of Kiriwinian payments and gifts and barter.

In Chapter II, speaking of some features of Trobriand tribal life, I was led to criticise the current views of primitive economic man. They depict him as a being indolent, independent, happy-go-lucky, yet at the same time governed exclusively by strictly rational and utilitarian motives, and logical and consistent in his behaviour. In this chapter again, in Division II, I pointed out another fallacy implied in this conception, a fallacy which declares that a savage is capable only of very simple, unorganised and unsystematic forms of labour. Another error more or less explicitly expressed in all writings on primitive economics, is that the natives possess only rudimentary forms of trade and exchange; that these forms play no essential part in the tribal life, are carried on only spasmodically and at rare intervals, and as necessity dictates.[167]

Whether we have to deal with the wide-spread fallacy of the primitive Golden Age, characterised mainly by the absence of any distinction between mine and thine; or whether we take the more sophisticated view, which postulates stages of individual search for food, and of isolated household catering; or if we consider for the moment the numerous theories which see nothing in primitive economics but simple pursuits for the maintenance of existence—in none of these can we find reflected even a hint of the real state of affairs as found in the Trobriands; namely, that the whole tribal life is permeated by a constant give and take; that every ceremony, every legal and customary act is done to the accompaniment of material gift and counter gift; that wealth, given and taken, is one of the main instruments of social organisation, of the power of the chief, of the bonds of kinship, and of relationship in law.2

These views on primitive trade, prevalent though erroneous, appear no doubt quite consistent, that is, if we grant certain premises. Now these premises seem plausible, and yet they are false, and it will be good to have a careful look at them so that we can discard them once and for all. They are based on some sort of reasoning, such as the following one: If, in tropical conditions, there is a plenty of all utilities, why trouble about exchanging them? Then, why attach any value to them? Is there any reason for striving after wealth, where everyone can have as much as he wants without much effort? Is there indeed any room for value, if this latter is the result of [168]scarcity as well as utility, in a community, in which all the useful things are plentiful? On the other hand, in those savage communities where the necessities of life are scarce, there is obviously no possibility of accumulating them, and thus creating wealth.