the origin of humanity, this clan emerges first from underground and
in some it emerges second in time, but as the clan of highest rank,
though in this it has to yield afterwards to the Malasi. The main
Kultur-hero of Kiriwina, the ogre-slayer Tudava, belongs, also to the
clan of Lukuba. There is even a historic fact, which agrees with this
mythological primacy, and subsequent eclipse. The Lukuba were, some six
or seven generations ago, the leading clan in Vakuta, and then they
had to surrender the chieftainship of this place to the Malasi clan,
when the sub-clan of the Tabalu, the Malasi chiefs of the highest
rank in Kiriwina, migrated South, and settled down in Vakuta. In the
myths quoted here, the Lukuba are leading canoe-builders, sailors,
and adventurers, that is with one exception, that of Tokosikuna,
who, though excelling in all other respects, knows nothing of canoe
construction.




V

Let us now proceed to the last named mythological centre, and
taking a very big step from the Marshall Bennetts, return to Tewara,
and to its myth of the origin of the Kula. I shall tell this myth
in a translation, closely following the original account, obtained
in Kiriwinian from an informant at Oburaku. I had an opportunity of
checking and amending his narrative, by the information obtained from
a native of Sanaro'a in pidgin English.


           THE STORY OF KASABWAYBWAYRETA AND GUMAKARAKEDAKEDA

    "Kasabwaybwayreta lived in Tewara. He heard the renown of a soulava
    (spondylus necklace) which was lying (kept) in Wawela. Its name
    was Gumakarakedakeda. He said to his children: 'Let us go to
    Wawela, make Kula to get this soulava.' He put into his canoe
    unripe coco-nut, undeveloped betel-nut, green bananas."

    "They went to Wawela; they anchored in Wawela. His sons went
    ashore, they went to obtain Gumakarakedakeda. He remained in the
    canoe. His son made offering of food, they (the Wawela people)
    refused. Kasabwaybwayreta spoke a charm over the betel-nut: it
    yellowed (became ripe); he spoke the charm over the coco-nut:
    its soft kernel swelled; he charmed the bananas they ripened. He
    took off his hair, his gray hair; his wrinkled skin, it remained
    in the canoe. He rose, he went he gave a pokala offering of food,
    he received the valuable necklace as Kula gift, for he was already
    a beautiful man. He went, he put it down, he thrust it into his
    hair. He came to the canoe, he took his covering (the sloughed
    skin); he donned the wrinkles, the gray hairs, he remained."

    "His sons arrived, they took their places in the canoe, they
    sailed to Giribwa. They cooked their food. He called his grandson;
    'Oh, my grandson, come here, look for my lice.' The grandson came
    there, stepped near him. Kasabwaybwayreta spoke, telling him: 'My
    grandson, catch my lice in the middle (of my hair).' His grandson
    parted his hair; he saw the valuable necklace, Gumakarakedakeda
    remaining there in the hair of Kasabwaybwayreta. 'Ee...' he spoke
    to his father, telling him, 'My father, Kasabwaybwayreta already
    obtained Gumakarakedakeda.' 'O, no, he did not obtain it! I am a
    chief, I am beautiful, I have not obtained that valuable. Indeed,
    would this wrinkled old man have obtained the necklace? No,
    indeed!' 'Truly, my father, he has obtained it already. I have
    seen it; already it remains in his hair!'"

    "All the water-vessels are empty already; the son went into the
    canoe, spilled the water so that it ran out, and only the empty
    vessels (made of coco-nut shell) remained. Later on they sailed,
    they went to an island, Gabula (Gabuwana in Amphlettan and in
    Dobuan). This man, Kasabwaybwayreta wanted water, and spoke to
    his son. This man picked up the water vessels--no, they were all
    empty. They went on the beach of Gabula, the usagelu (members
    of the crew) dug out their water-holes (in the beach). This man
    remained in the canoe and called out: 'O my grandson, bring me here
    my water, go there and dip out my water!' The grandson said: 'No,
    come here and dip out (yourself)!' Later on, they dipped out water,
    they finished, and Kasabwaybwayreta came. They muddied the water,
    it was muddy. He sat down, he waited."

    "They went, they sailed in the canoe. Kasabwaybwayreta called out,
    'O, my son, why do you cast me off?' Spoke the son: 'I think you
    have obtained Gumakarakedakeda!' 'O, by and by, my son, when we
    arrive in the village, I shall give it to you!' 'O, no!' 'Well,
    you remain, I shall go!' He takes a stone, a binabina one, this
    man Kasabwaybwayreta, he throws so that he might make a hole in
    the canoe, and the men might go into the sea. No! they sped away,
    they went, this stone stands up, it has made an island in the
    sea. They went, they anchored in Tewara. They (the villagers)
    asked: 'And where is Kasabwaybwayreta?' 'O, his son got angry
    with him, already he had obtained Gumakarakedakeda!'"

    "Well, then, this man Kasabwaybwayreta remained in the island
    Gabula. He saw Tokom'mwawa (evening star) approach. He spoke:
    'My friend, come here, let me just enter into your canoe!' 'O no,
    I shall go to another place.' There came Kaylateku (Sirius). He
    asked him: 'Let me go with you.' He refused. There came Kayyousi
    (Southern Cross). Kasabwaybwayreta wanted to go with him. He
    refused. There came Umnakayva'u, (Alpha and Beta Centauri). He
    wanted a place in his canoe. He refused. There came Kibi
    (three stars widely distant, forming no constellation in our
    sky-chart). He also refused to take Kasabwaybwayreta. There came
    Uluwa (the Pleiades). Kasabwaybwayreta asked him to take him. Uluwa
    said: 'You wait, you look out, there will come Kaykiyadiga,
    he will take you.' There came Kaykiyadiga (the three central
    stars in Orion's belt). Kasabwaybwayreta asked him: 'My friend,
    which way will you go?' 'I shall come down on top of Taryebutu
    mountain. I shall go down, I shall go away.' 'Oh, my friend, come
    here, let me just sit down (on you).' 'Oh come,--see on one side
    there is a va'i (stingaree) on the other side, there is the lo'u
    (a fish with poisonous spikes); you sit in the middle, it will
    be well! Where is your village?' 'My village is Tewara.' 'What
    stands in the site of your village?' 'In the site of my village,
    there stands a busa tree!'"

    "They went there. Already the village of Kasabwaybwayreta is
    straight below them. He charmed this busa tree, it arose, it went
    straight up into the skies. Kasabwaybwayreta changed place (from
    Orion's belt on to the tree), he sat on the busa tree. He spoke:
    'Oh, my friend, break asunder this necklace. Part of it, I shall
    give you; part of it, I shall carry to Tewara.' He gave part of
    it to his companion. This busa tree came down to the ground. He
    was angry because his son left him behind. He went underground
    inside. He there remained for a long time. The dogs came there,
    and they dug and dug. They dug him out. He came out on top, he
    became a tauva'u (evil spirit, see Chapter II, Division VII.) He
    hits human beings. That is why in Tewara the village is that of
    sorcerers and witches, because of Kasabwaybwayreta."


To make this somewhat obscure narrative clearer, a short commentary
is necessary. The first part tells of a Kula expedition in which the
hero, his son, his grandson, and some other members of the crew take
part. His son takes with him good, fresh food, to give as solicitory
offering and thus tempt his partners to present him with the famous
necklace. The son is a young man and also a chief of renown. The
later stages are clearer; by means of magic, the hero changes
himself into a young, attractive man, and makes his own unripe, bad
fruit into splendid gifts to be offered to his partner. He obtains
the prize without difficulty, and hides it in his hair. Then, in a
moment of weakness, and for motives which it is impossible to find
out from native commentators, he on purpose reveals the necklace
to his grandson. Most likely, the motive was vanity. His son, and
probably also the other companions, become very angry and set a trap
for him. They arrange things so that he has to go for his own water
on the beach of Gabula. When they have already got theirs and while
he is dipping it out, they sail away, leaving him marooned on the
sand-bank. Like Polyphemus after the escaping party of Odysseus,
he throws a stone at the treacherous canoe, but it misses its mark,
and becomes an outstanding rock in the sea.

The episode of his release by the stars is quite clear. Arrived at
the village, he makes a tree rise by his magic, and after he has
given the bigger part of his necklace to his rescuer, he descends,
with the smaller part. His going underground and subsequent turning
into a tauva'u shows how bitter he feels towards humanity. As usual,
the presence of such a powerful, evil personality in the village,
gives its stamp to the whole community, and this latter produces
sorcerers and witches. All these additions and comments I obtained
in cross-questioning my original informant.

The Dobuan informant from Sanaro'a introduced one or two variants into
the second part of the narrative. According to him, Kasabwaybwayreta
marries while in the sky, and remains there long enough to beget
three male and two female children. After he has made up his mind to
descend to earth again, he Makes a hole in the heavens, looks down and
sees a betel-nut tree in his village. Then he speaks to his child,
'When I go down, you pull at one end of the necklace.' He climbs
down by means of the necklace on to the betel palm and pulls at
one end of Gumakarakedakeda. It breaks, a big piece remains in the
skies, the small one goes with him below. Arrived in the village,
he arranges a feast, and invites all the villagers to it. He speaks
some magic over the food and after they have eaten it, the villagers
are turned into birds. This last act is quite in harmony with his
profession of tauva'u, which he assumed in the previous version of
the myth. My Dobuan informant also added, by way of commentary, that
the companions of Kasabwaybwayreta were angry with him, because he
obtained the necklace in Boyowa, which was not the right direction
for a necklace to travel in the Kula. This, however, is obviously a
rationalisation of the events of the myth.

Comparing the previously related story of Tokosikuna with this
one, we see at once a clear resemblance between them in several
features. In both, the heroes start as old, decrepit, and very ugly
men. By their magical powers, they rejuvenate in the course of the
story, the one permanently, the other just sloughing off his skin
for the purpose of a Kula transaction. In both cases, the hero is
definitely superior in the Kula, and by this arouses the envy and
hatred of his companions. Again, in both stories, the companions
decide to punish the hero, and the island or sandbank of Gabuwana is
the scene of the punishment. In both, the hero finally settles in the
South, only in one case it is his original home, while in the other
he has migrated there from one of the Marshall Bennett Islands. An
anomaly in the Kasabwaybwayreta myth, namely, that he fetches his
necklace from the North, whereas the normal direction for necklaces
to travel is from South to North in this region, makes us suspect
that perhaps this story is a transformation of a legend about a man
who made the Kula from the North. Ill-treated by his companions, he
settled in Tewara, and becoming a local Kultur-hero, was afterwards
described as belonging to the place. However this might be, and the
hypothetical interpretation is mine, and not obtained from the natives,
the two stories are so similar that they must be regarded obviously
as variants of the same myth, and not as independent traditions.




VI

So much about the ethnographic analysis of these myths. Let us now
return to the general, sociological considerations with which we opened
this digression into mythology. We are now better able to realise to
what extent and in what manner Kula myths influence the native outlook.

The main social force governing all tribal life could be described
as the inertia of custom, the love of uniformity of behaviour. The
great moral philosopher was wrong when he formulated his categorical
imperative, which was to serve human beings as a fundamental guiding
principle of behaviour. In advising us to act so that our behaviour
might be taken as a norm of universal law, he reversed the natural
state of things. The real rule guiding human behaviour is this:
"what everyone else does, what appears as norm of general conduct,
this is right, moral and proper. Let me look over the fence and see
what my neighbour does, and take it as a rule for my behaviour." So
acts every 'man-in-the-street' in our own society, so has acted the
average member of any society through the past ages, and so acts the
present-day savage; and the lower his level of cultural development,
the greater stickler he will be for good manners, propriety and
form, and the more incomprehensive and odious to him will be the
non-conforming point of view. Systems of social philosophy have
been built to explain and interpret or misinterpret this general
principle. Tarde's 'Imitation,' Giddings' 'Consciousness of Kind,'
Durkheim's 'Collective Ideas,' and many such conceptions as 'social
consciousness,' 'the soul of a nation,' 'group mind' or now-a-days
prevalent and highly fashionable ideas about 'suggestibility of the
crowd,' 'the instinct of herd,' etc., etc., try to cover this simple
empirical truth. Most of these systems, especially those evoking
the Phantom of Collective Soul are futile, to my mind, in so far as
they try to explain in the terms of a hypothesis that which is most
fundamental in sociology, and can therefore be reduced to nothing
else, but must be simply recognised and accepted as the basis of
our science. To frame verbal definitions and quibble over terms does
not seem to bring us much more forward in a new branch of learning,
where a knowledge of facts is above all needed.

Whatever might be the case with any theoretical interpretations of
this principle, in this place, we must simply emphasise that a strict
adherence to custom, to that which is done by everyone else, is the
main rule of conduct among our natives in the Trobriands. An important
corollary to this rule declares that the past is more important than
the present. What has been done by the father--or, as the Trobriander
would say, by the maternal uncle--is even more important as norm of
behaviour than what is done by the brother. It is to the behaviour
of the past generations that the Trobriander instinctively looks for
his guidance. Thus the mythical events which relate what has been
done, not by the immediate ancestors but by mythical, illustrious
forbears, must evidently carry an enormous social weight. The stories
of important past events are hallowed because they belong to the
great mythical generations and because they are generally accepted
as truth, for everybody knows and tells them. They bear the sanction
of righteousness and propriety in virtue of these two qualities of
preterity and universality.

Thus, through the operation of what might be called the elementary law
of sociology, myth possesses the normative power of fixing custom,
of sanctioning modes of behaviour, of giving dignity and importance
to an institution. The Kula receives from these ancient stories
its stamp of extreme importance and value. The rules of commercial
honour, of generosity and punctiliousness in all its operations,
acquire through this their binding force. This is what we could call
the normative influence of myth on custom.

The Kula myth, however, exercises another kind of appeal. In the Kula,
we have a type of enterprise where the vast possibilities of success
are very much influenced by chance. A man, whether he be rich or poor
in partners, may, according to his luck, return with a relatively
big or a small haul from an expedition. Thus the imagination of the
adventurers, as in all forms of gambling, must be bent towards lucky
hits and turns of extraordinarily good chance. The Kula myths feed
this imagination on stories of extreme good luck, and at the same time
show that it lies in the hands of man to bring this luck on himself,
provided he acquires the necessary magical lore.

I have said before that the mythological events are distinct from
those happening nowadays, in so far as they are extraordinary and
super-normal. This adds both to their authoritative character and to
their desirability. It sets them before the native as a specially
valuable standard of conduct, and as an ideal towards which their
desires must go out.




VII

But I also said before that, distinct as it is, the mythical world
is not separated by an unbridgeable gulf from the present order of
events. Indeed, though an ideal must be always beyond what actually
exists, yet it must appear just within reach of realisation if it
is to be effective at all. Now, after we have become acquainted with
their stories, we can see clearly what was meant when it was said, that
magic acts as a link between the mythical and the actual realities. In
the canoe myth, for instance, the flying, the super-normal achievement
of the Kudayuri canoe, is conceived only as the highest degree of the
virtue of speed, which is still being imparted nowadays to canoes by
magic. The magical heritage of the Kudayuri clan is still there, making
the canoes sail fast. Had it been transmitted in its complete form,
any present canoe, like the mythical one, could be seen flying. In
the Kula myths also, magic is found to give super-normal powers of
beauty, strength and immunity from danger. The mythological events
demonstrate the truth of the claims of magic. Their validity is
established by a sort of retrospective, mythical empiry. But magic,
as it is practised nowadays, accomplishes the same effects, only in a
smaller degree. Natives believe deeply that the formulæ and rites of
mwasila magic make those who carry them out attractive, irresistible
and safe from dangers (compare next chapter).

Another feature which brings the mythical events into direct
connection with the present state of affairs, is the sociology of
mythical personages. They all are associated with certain localities,
as are the present local groups. They belong to the same system of
totemic division into clans and sub-clans as obtains nowadays. Thus,
members of a sub-clan, or a local unit, can claim a mythical hero
as their direct ancestor, and members of a clan can boast of him
as of a clansman. Indeed, myths, like songs and fairy stories, are
'owned' by certain sub-clans. This does not mean that other people
would abstain from telling them, but members of the sub-clan are
supposed to possess the most intimate knowledge of the mythical
events, and to be an authority in interpreting them. And indeed,
it is a rule that a myth will be best known in its own locality,
that is, known with all the details and free from any adulterations
or not quite genuine additions and fusions.

This better knowledge can be easily understood, if we remember
that myth is very often connected with magic in the Trobriands, and
that this latter is a possession, kept by some members of the local
group. Now, to know the magic, and to understand it properly, it is
necessary to be well acquainted with the myth. This is the reason
why the myth must be better known in the local group with which it is
connected. In some cases, the local group has not only to practise the
magic associated with the myth, but it has to look after the observance
of certain rites, ceremonies and taboos connected with it. In this
case, the sociology of the mythical events is intimately bound up with
the social divisions as they exist now. But even in such myths as those
of the Kula, which have become the property of all clans and local
groups within the district, the explicit statement of the hero's clan,
sub-clan and of his village gives the whole myth a stamp of actuality
and reality. Side by side with magic, the sociological continuity
bridges over the gap between the mythical and the actual. And indeed
the magical and the sociological bridges run side by side.

I spoke above (beginning of Division II) of the enlivening influence
of myth upon landscape. Here it must be noted also that the mythically
changed features of the landscape bear testimony in the native's mind
to the truth of the myth. The mythical word receives its substance
in rock and hill, in the changes in land and sea. The pierced
sea-passages, the cleft boulders, the petrified human beings, all these
bring the mythological world close to the natives, make it tangible and
permanent. On the other hand, the story thus powerfully illustrated,
re-acts on the landscape, fills it with dramatic happenings, which,
fixed there for ever, give it a definite meaning. With this I shall
close these general remarks on mythology though with myth and mythical
events we shall constantly meet in further inquiries.




VIII

As we return to our party, who, sailing past the mythical centre of
Tewara, make for the island of Sanaro'a, the first thing to be related
about them, brings us straight to another mythological story. As
the natives enter the district of Siayawawa, they pass a stone or
rock, called Sinatemubadiye'i. I have not seen it, but the natives
tell me it lies among the mangroves in a tidal creek. Like the stone
Gurewaya, mentioned before, this one also enjoys certain privileges,
and offerings are given to it.

The natives do not tarry in this unimportant district. Their final goal
is now in sight. Beyond the sea, which is here land-locked like a lake,
the hills of Dobu, topped by Koyava'u loom before them. In the distance
to their right as they sail South, the broad Easterly flank of Koyatabu
runs down to the water, forming a deep valley; behind them spreads
the wide plain of Sanaro'a, with a few volcanic cones at its Northern
end, and far to the left the mountains of Normanby unfold in a long
chain. They sail straight South, making for the beach of Sarubwoyna,
where they will have to pause for a ritual halt in order to carry
out the final preparations and magic. They steer towards two black
rocks, which mark the Northern end of Sarubwoyna beach as they stand,
one at the base, the other at the end of a narrow, sandy spit. These
are the two rocks Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a, the most important of
the tabooed places, at which natives lay offerings when starting or
arriving on Kula expeditions. The rock among the mangroves of Siyawawa
is connected with these two by a mythical story. The three--two men
whom we see now before us in petrified form, and one woman--came to
this district from somewhere 'Omuyuwa,' that is, from Woodlark Island
or the Marshall Bennetts. This is the story:


           MYTH OF ATU'A'INE, ATURAMO'A AND SINATEMUBADIYE'I.

    "They were two brothers and a sister. They came first to the creek
    called Kadawaga in Siyawawa. The woman lost her comb. She spoke
    to her brethren: 'My brothers, my comb fell down.' They answered
    her: 'Good, return, take your comb.' She found it and took it,
    and next day she said: 'Well, I shall remain here already,
    as Sinatemubadiye'i.'"

    "The brothers went on. When they arrived at the shore of the main
    island, Atu'a'ine said: 'Aturamo'a, how shall we go? Shall we look
    towards the sea?' Said Aturamo'a; 'O, no, let us look towards the
    jungle.' Aturamo'a went ahead, deceiving his brother, for he was
    a cannibal. He wanted to look towards the jungle, so that he might
    eat men. Thus Aturamo'a went ahead, and his eyes turned towards the
    jungle. Atu'a'ine turned his eyes, looked over the sea, he spoke:
    'Why did you deceive me, Aturamo'a? Whilst I am looking towards the
    sea, you look towards the jungle.' Aturamo'a later on returned and
    came towards the sea. He spoke, 'Good, you Atu'a'ine, look towards
    the sea, I shall look to the jungle!' This man, who sits near
    the jungle, is a cannibal, the one who sits near the sea is good."


This short version of the myth I obtained in Sinaketa. The story shows
us three people migrating for unknown reasons from the North-East to
this district. The sister, after having lost her comb, decides to
remain in Siyawawa, and turns into the rock Sinatemubadiye'i. The
brothers go only a few miles further, to undergo the same
transformation at the Northern end of Sarubwoyna beach. There
is the characteristic distinction between the cannibal and the
non-cannibal. As the story was told to me in Boyowa, that is, in the
district where they were not man-eaters, the qualification of 'good'
was given to the non-cannibal hero, who became the rock further out
to sea. The same distinction is to be found in the previously quoted
myth of the Kudayuri sisters who flew to Dobu, and it is to be found
also in a myth, told about the origins of cannibalism, which I shall
not quote here. The association between the jungle and cannibalism on
the one hand, and between the sea and abstention from human flesh on
the other, is the same as the one in the Kudayuri myth. In that myth,
the rock which looks towards the South is cannibal, while the Northern
one is not, and for the natives this is the reason why the Dobuans
do eat human flesh and the Boyowans do not. The designation of one
of these rocks as a man-eater (tokamlata'u) has no further meaning,
more especially it is not associated with the belief that any special
dangers surround the rock.

The importance of these two rocks, Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a lies,
however, not so much in the truncated myth as in the ritual surrounding
them. Thus, all three stones receive an offering--pokala--consisting of
a bit of coco-nut, a stale yam, a piece of sugar cane and banana. As
the canoes go past, the offerings are placed on the stone, or thrown
towards it, with the words:


    "Old man (or in the case of Sinatemubadiye'i, 'old woman') here
    comes your coco-nut, your sugar cane, your bananas, bring me good
    luck so that I may go and make my Kula quickly in Tu'utauna."


This offering is given by the Boyowan canoes on their way to Dobu, and
by the Dobuans as they start on the Kula Northwards, to Boyowa. Besides
the offerings, certain taboos and observances are kept at these
rocks. Thus, any people passing close to the rock would have to bathe
in the sea out of their canoes, and the children in the canoes would
be sprinkled with sea-water. This is done to prevent disease. A man
who would go for the first time to kula in Dobu would not be allowed
to eat food in the vicinity of these rocks. A pig, or a green coco-nut
would not be placed on the soil in this neighbourhood, but would have
to be put on a mat. A novice in the Kula would have to make a point
of going and bathing at the foot of Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a.

The Dobuans pokala some other stones, to which the Boyowans do not
give any offerings. The previously mentioned Gurewaya rock receives
its share from the Dobuans, who believe that if they passed it close
by without making a pokala, they would become covered with sores
and die. Passing Gurewaya, they would not stand up in their canoes,
nor would they eat any food when camping on a beach within sight of
Gurewaya. If they did so, they would become seasick, fall asleep, and
their canoe would drift away into the unknown. I do not know whether
there is any myth in Dobu about the Gurewaya stone. There is a belief
that a big snake is coiled on the top of this rock, which looks after
the observance of the taboos, and in case of breach of any of them
would send down sickness on them. Some of the taboos of Gurewaya are
also kept by the Boyowans, but I do not exactly know which.

I obtained from a Dobuan informant a series of names of other,
similar stones, lying to the East of Dobu, on the route between there
and Tubetube. Thus, somewhere in the district of Du'a'u, there is
a rock called Kokorakakedakeda. Besides this, near a place called
Makaydokodoko there is a stone, Tabudaya. Further East, near Bunama,
a small stone called Sinada enjoys some Kula prestige. In a spot
Sina'ena, which I cannot place on the map, there is a stone called
Taryadabwoyro, with eye, nose, legs and hind-quarters shaped like
those of a pig. This stone is called 'the mother of all the pigs,'
and the district of Sina'ena is renowned for the abundance of these
animals there.

The only mythical fragment about any of these stones which I obtained
is the one quoted above. Like the two Kula myths previously adduced,
it is a story of a migration from North to South. There is no allusion
to the Kula in the narrative, but as the stones are pokala'd in the
Kula, there is evidently some association between it and them. To
understand this association better, it must be realised that similar
offerings are given in certain forms of magic to ancestral spirits and
to spirits of Kultur-heroes, who have founded the institution in which
the magic is practised. This suggests the conclusion that Atu'a'ine and
Aturamo'a are heroes of the Kula like Tokosikuna and Kasabwaybwayreta;
and that their story is another variant of the fundamental Kula myth.