ARGONAUTS OF THE WESTERN PACIFIC
An Account of Native
Enterprise and Adventure
in the Archipelagoes of
Melanesian New Guinea
By
Bronislaw Malinowski
PH.D. (Cracow), D.Sc. (London)
With a Preface
By
Sir James George, Frazer, F.B.A., F.R.S.
With Maps, Illustrations, and Figures,
London: George Routledge & Sons, Ltd.
New York: E. P. Dutton & Co.
To
my friend and teacher
Professor C. G. Seligman, F.R.S.
PREFACE
By Sir James G. Frazer
My esteemed friend, Dr. B. Malinowski has asked me to write a preface
to his book, and I willingly comply with his request, though I can
hardly think that any words of mine will add to the value of the
remarkable record of anthropological research which he has given us
in this volume. My observations, such as they are, will deal partly
with the writer's method and partly with the matter of his book.
In regard to method, Dr. Malinowski has done his work, as it appears
to me, under the best conditions and in the manner calculated to
secure the best possible results. Both by theoretical training and
by practical experience he was well equipped for the task which he
undertook. Of his theoretical training he had given proof in his
learned and thoughtful treatise on the family among the aborigines
of Australia []; of his practical experience he had produced no
less satisfactory evidence in his account of the natives of Mailu
in New Guinea, based on a residence of six months among them. []
In the Trobriand Islands, to the east of New Guinea, to which he
next turned his attention, Dr. Malinowski lived as a native among
the natives for many months together, watching them daily at work
and at play, conversing with them in their own tongue, and deriving
all his information from the surest sources--personal observation
and statements made to him directly by the natives in their own
language without the intervention of an interpreter. In this way he
has accumulated a large mass of materials, of high scientific value,
bearing on the social, religious, and economic or industrial life
of the Trobriand Islanders. These he hopes and intends to publish
hereafter in full; meantime he has given us in the present volume a
preliminary study of an interesting and peculiar feature in Trobriand
society, the remarkable system of exchange, only in part economic or
commercial, which the islanders maintain among themselves and with
the inhabitants of neighbouring islands.
Little reflection is needed to convince us of the fundamental
importance of economic forces at all stages of man's career from the
humblest to the highest. After all, the human species is part of the
animal creation, and as such, like the rest of the animals, it reposes
on a material foundation; on which a higher life, intellectual, moral,
social, may be built, but without which no such superstructure is
possible. That material foundation, consisting in the necessity of food
and of a certain degree of warmth and shelter from the elements, forms
the economic or industrial basis and prime condition of human life. If
anthropologists have hitherto unduly neglected it, we may suppose that
it was rather because they were attracted to the higher side of man's
nature than because they deliberately ignored and undervalued the
importance and indeed necessity of the lower. In excuse for their
neglect we may also remember that anthropology is still a young
science, and that the multitude of problems which await the student
cannot all be attacked at once, but must be grappled with one by
one. Be that as it may, Dr. Malinowski has done well to emphasise the
great significance of primitive economics by singling out the notable
exchange system of the Trobriand Islanders for special consideration.
Further, he has wisely refused to limit himself to a mere description
of the processes of the exchange, and has set himself to penetrate
the motives which underlie it and the feelings which it excites in
the minds of the natives. It appears to be sometimes held that pure
sociology should confine itself to the description of acts and should
leave the problems of motives and feelings to psychology. Doubtless
it is true that the analysis of motives and feelings is logically
distinguishable from the description of acts, and that it falls,
strictly speaking, within the sphere of psychology; but in practice
an act has no meaning for an observer unless he knows or infers the
thoughts and emotions of the agent; hence to describe a series of
acts, without any reference to the state of mind of the agent, would
not answer the purpose of sociology, the aim of which is not merely
to register but to understand the actions of men in society. Thus
sociology cannot fulfil its task without calling in at every turn
the aid of psychology.
It is characteristic of Dr. Malinowski's method that he takes full
account of the complexity of human nature. He sees man, so to say, in
the round and not in the flat. He remembers that man is a creature of
emotion at least as much as of reason, and he is constantly at pains
to discover the emotional as well as the rational basis of human
action. The man of science, like the man of letters, is too apt to
view mankind only in the abstract, selecting for his consideration
a single side of our complex and many-sided being. Of this one-sided
treatment Molière is a conspicuous example among great writers. All his
characters are seen only in the flat: one of them is a miser, another
a hypocrite, another a coxcomb, and soon; but not one of them is a
man. All are dummies dressed up to look very like human beings; but
the likeness is only on the surface, all within is hollow and empty,
because truth to nature has been sacrificed to literary effect. Very
different is the presentation of human nature in the greater artists,
such as Cervantes and Shakespeare: their characters are solid, being
drawn not from one side only but from many. No doubt in science a
certain abstractness of treatment is not merely legitimate, but
necessary, since science is nothing but knowledge raised to the
highest power, and all knowledge implies a process of abstraction
and generalisation: even the recognition of an individual whom we see
every day is only possible as the result of an abstract idea of him
formed by generalisation from his appearances in the past. Thus the
science of man is forced to abstract certain aspects of human nature
and to consider them apart from the concrete reality; or rather it
falls into a number of sciences, each of which considers a single part
of man's complex organism, it may be the physical, the intellectual,
the moral, or the social side of his being; and the general conclusions
which it draws will present a more or less incomplete picture of man
as a whole, because the lines which compose it are necessarily but
a few picked out of a multitude.
In the present treatise Dr. Malinowski is mainly concerned with what
at first sight might seem a purely economic activity of the Trobriand
Islanders; but, with his usual width of outlook and fineness of
perception, he is careful to point out that the curious circulation of
valuables, which takes place between the inhabitants of the Trobriand
and other islands, while it is accompanied by ordinary trade, is by no
means itself a purely commercial transaction; he shows that it is not
based on a simple calculation of utility, of profit and loss, but that
it satisfies emotional and æsthetic needs of a higher order than the
mere gratification of animal wants. This leads Dr. Malinowski to pass
some severe strictures on the conception of the Primitive Economic Man
as a kind of bogey who, it appears, still haunts economic text-books
and even extends his blighting influence to the minds of certain
anthropologists. Rigged out in cast-off garments of Mr. Jeremy Bentham
and Mr. Gradgrind, this horrible phantom is apparently actuated by no
other motive than that of filthy lucre, which he pursues relentlessly,
on Spencerian principles, along the line of least resistance. If
such a dismal fiction is really regarded by serious inquirers as
having any counterpart in savage society, and not simply as a useful
abstraction, Dr. Malinowski's account of the Kula in this book should
help to lay the phantom by the heels; for he proves that the trade in
useful objects, which forms part of the Kula system, is in the minds
of the natives entirely subordinate in importance to the exchange
of other objects, which serve no utilitarian purpose whatever. In
its combination of commercial enterprise, social organisation,
mythical background, and magical ritual, to say nothing of the wide
geographical range of its operations, this singular institution appears
to have no exact parallel in the existing anthropological record; but
its discoverer, Dr. Malinowski, may very well be right in surmising
that it is probably a type of institution of which analogous, if not
precisely similar, instances will hereafter be brought to light by
further research among savage and barbarous peoples.
Not the least interesting and instructive feature of the Kula, as it
is described for us by Dr. Malinowski, is the extremely important part
which magic is seen to play in the institution. From his description
it appears that in the minds of the natives the performance of magical
rites and the utterance of magical words are indispensable for the
success of the enterprise in all its phases, from the felling of
the trees out of which the canoes are to be hollowed, down to the
moment when, the expedition successfully accomplished, the argosy
with its precious cargo is about to start on its homeward voyage. And
incidentally we learn that magical ceremonies and spells are deemed
no less necessary for the cultivation of gardens and for success in
fishing, the two forms of industrial enterprise which furnish the
islanders with their principal means of support; hence the garden
magician, whose business it is to promote the growth of the garden
produce by his hocus-pocus, is one of the most important men in the
village, ranking next after the chief and the sorcerer. In short,
magic is believed to be an absolutely essential adjunct of every
industrial undertaking, being just as requisite for its success
as the mechanical operations involved in it, such as the caulking,
painting and launching of a canoe, the planting of a garden, and the
setting of a fish-trap. "A belief in magic," says Dr. Malinowski,
"is one of the main psychological forces which allow for organisation
and systematisation of economic effort in the Trobriands."
This valuable account of magic as a factor of fundamental economic
importance for the welfare and indeed for the very existence of the
community should suffice to dispel the erroneous view that magic,
as opposed to religion, is in its nature essentially maleficent and
anti-social, being always used by an individual for the promotion of
his own selfish ends and the injury of his enemies, quite regardless
of its effect on the common weal. No doubt magic may be so employed,
and has in fact probably been so employed, in every part of the
world; in the Trobriand Islands themselves it is believed to
be similarly practised for nefarious purposes by sorcerers, who
inspire the natives with the deepest dread and the most constant
concern. But in itself magic is neither beneficent nor maleficent;
it is simply an imaginary power of controlling the forces of nature,
and this control may be exercised by the magician for good or evil,
for the benefit or injury of individuals and of the community. In
this respect, magic is exactly on the same footing with the sciences,
of which it is the bastard sister. They, too, in themselves, are
neither good nor evil, though they become the source of one or other
according to their application. It would be absurd, for example,
to stigmatise pharmacy as antisocial, because a knowledge of the
properties of drugs is often employed to destroy men as well as to
heal them. It is equally absurd to neglect the beneficent application
of magic and to single out its maleficent use as the characteristic
property by which to define it. The processes of nature, over which
science exercises a real and magic an imaginary control, are not
affected by the moral disposition, the good or bad intention, of the
individual who uses his knowledge to set them in motion. The action
of drugs on the human body is precisely the same whether they are
administered by a physician or by a poisoner. Nature and her handmaid
Science are neither friendly nor hostile to morality; they are simply
indifferent to it and equally ready to do the bidding of the saint
and of the sinner, provided only that he gives them the proper word
of command. If the guns are well loaded and well aimed, the fire
of the battery will be equally destructive, whether the gunners are
patriots fighting in defence of their country or invaders waging a
war of unjust aggression. The fallacy of differentiating a science
or an art according to its application and the moral intention of the
agent is obvious enough with regard to pharmacy and artillery; it is
equally real, though to many people apparently it is less obvious,
with regard to magic.
The immense influence wielded by magic over the whole life and thought
of the Trobriand Islanders is perhaps the feature of Dr. Malinowski's
book which makes the most abiding impression on the mind of the
reader. He tells us that "magic, the attempt of man to govern the
forces of nature directly by means of a special lore, is all-pervading
and all-important in the Trobriands"; it is "interwoven into all the
many industrial and communal activities"; "all the data which have
been so far mustered disclose the extreme importance of magic in the
Kula. But if it were a question of treating of any other aspect of the
tribal life of these natives, it would also be found that, whenever
they approach any concern of vital importance, they summon magic to
their aid. It can be said without exaggeration that magic, according
to their ideas, governs human destinies; that it supplies man with the
power of mastering the forces of nature; and that it is his weapon and
armour against the many dangers which crowd in upon him on every side."
Thus in the view of the Trobriand Islanders, magic is a power of
supreme importance either for good or evil; it can make or mar the life
of man; it can sustain and protect the individual and the community,
or it can injure and destroy them. Compared to this universal and
deep-rooted conviction, the belief in the existence of the spirits of
the dead would seem to exercise but little influence on the life of
these people. Contrary to the general attitude of savages towards the
souls of the departed, they are reported to be almost completely devoid
of any fear of ghosts. They believe, indeed, that the ghosts return
to their villages once a year to partake of the great annual feast;
but "in general the spirits do not influence human beings very much,
for better or worse"; "there is nothing of the mutual interaction,
of the intimate collaboration between man and spirit which are the
essence of religious cult." This conspicuous predominance of magic
over religion, at least over the worship of the dead, is a very notable
feature in the culture of a people so comparatively high in the scale
of savagery as the Trobriand Islanders. It furnishes a fresh proof
of the extraordinary strength and tenacity of the hold which this
world-wide delusion has had, and still has, upon the human mind.
We shall doubtless learn much as to the relation of magic and religion
among the Trobrianders from the full report of Dr. Malinowski's
researches in the islands. From the patient observation which he has
devoted to a single institution, and from the wealth of details with
which he has illustrated it, we may judge of the extent and value
of the larger work which he has in preparation. It promises to be
one of the completest and most scientific accounts ever given of a
savage people.
J. G. Frazer.
The Temple, London.
th March, .
FOREWORD
By the Author
Ethnology is in the sadly ludicrous, not to say tragic, position,
that at the very moment when it begins to put its workshop in order, to
forge its proper tools, to start ready for work on its appointed task,
the material of its study melts away with hopeless rapidity. Just now,
when the methods and aims of scientific field ethnology have taken
shape, when men fully trained for the work have begun to travel into
savage countries and study their inhabitants--these die away under
our very eyes.
The research which has been done on native races by men of academic
training has proved beyond doubt and cavil that scientific, methodic
inquiry can give us results far more abundant and of better quality
than those of even the best amateur's work. Most, though not all, of
the modern scientific accounts have opened up quite new and unexpected
aspects of tribal life. They have given us, in clear outline, the
picture of social institutions often surprisingly vast and complex;
they have brought before us the vision of the native as he is, in
his religious and magical beliefs and practices. They have allowed
us to penetrate into his mind far more deeply than we have ever done
before. From this new material, scientifically hall-marked, students
of comparative Ethnology have already drawn some very important
conclusions on the origin of human customs, beliefs and institutions;
on the history of cultures, and their spread and contact; on the laws
of human behaviour in society, and of the human mind.
The hope of gaining a new vision of savage humanity through the labours
of scientific specialists opens out like a mirage, vanishing almost
as soon as perceived. For though at present, there is still a large
number of native communities available for scientific study, within
a generation or two, they or their cultures will have practically
disappeared. The need for energetic work is urgent, and the time
is short. Nor, alas, up to the present, has any adequate interest
been taken by the public in these studies. The number of workers is
small, the encouragement they receive scanty. I feel therefore no
need to justify an ethnological contribution which is the result of
specialised research in the field.
In this volume I give an account of one phase of savage life only, in
describing certain forms of inter-tribal, trading relations among the
natives of New Guinea. This account has been culled, as a preliminary
monograph, from Ethnographic material, covering the whole extent of
the tribal culture of one district. One of the first conditions of
acceptable Ethnographic work certainly is that it should deal with
the totality of all social, cultural and psychological aspects of the
community, for they are so interwoven that not one can be understood
without taking into consideration all the others. The reader of this
monograph will clearly see that, though its main theme is economic--for
it deals with commercial enterprise, exchange and trade--constant
reference has to be made to social organisation, the power of magic,
to mythology and folklore, and indeed to all other aspects as well
as the main one.
The geographical area of which the book treats is limited to the
Archipelagoes lying off the eastern end of New Guinea. Even within
this, the main field of research was in one district, that of the
Trobriand Islands. This, however, has been studied minutely. I have
lived in that one archipelago for about two years, in the course
of three expeditions to New Guinea, during which time I naturally
acquired a thorough knowledge of the language. I did my work entirely
alone, living for the greater part of the time right in the villages. I
therefore had constantly the daily life of the natives before my eyes,
while accidental, dramatic occurrences, deaths, quarrels, village
brawls, public and ceremonial events, could not escape my notice.
In the present state of Ethnography, when so much has still to be
done in paving the way for forthcoming research and in fixing its
scope, each new contribution ought to justify its appearance in
several Points. It ought to show some advance in method; it ought
to push research beyond its previous limits in depth, in width, or
in both; finally, it ought to endeavour to present its results in a
manner exact, but not dry. The specialist interested in method, in
reading this work, will find set out in the Introduction, Divisions
II-IX and in Chapter XVIII, the exposition of my points of view and
efforts in this direction. The reader who is concerned with results,
rather than with the way of obtaining them, will find in Chapters
IV to XXI a consecutive narrative of the Kula expeditions, and the
various associated customs and beliefs. The student who is interested,
not only in the narrative, but in the ethnographic background for it,
and a clear definition of the institution, will find the first in
Chapters I and II, and the latter in Chapter III.
To Mr. Robert Mond I tender my sincerest thanks. It is to his generous
endowment that I owe the possibility of carrying on for several years
the research of which the present volume is a partial result. To
Mr. Atlee Hunt, C.M.G., Secretary of the Home and Territories
Department of the Commonwealth of Australia, I am indebted for the
financial assistance of the Department, and also for much help given
on the spot. In the Trobriands, I was immensely helped in my work
by Mr. B. Hancock, pearl trader, to whom I am grateful not only for
assistance and services, but for many acts of friendship.
Much of the argument in this book has been greatly improved by
the criticism given me by my friend, Mr. Paul Khuner, of Vienna,
an expert in the practical affairs of modern industry and a highly
competent thinker on economic matters. Professor L. T. Hobhouse has
kindly read the proofs and given me valuable advice on several points.
Sir James Frazer, by writing his Preface, has enhanced the value of
this volume beyond its merit and it is not only a great honour and
advantage for me to be introduced by him, but also a special pleasure,
for my first love for ethnology is associated with the reading of the
"Golden Bough," then in its second edition.
Last, not least, I wish to mention Professor C. G. Seligman, to whom
this book is dedicated. The initiative of my expedition was given by
him and I owe him more than I can express for the encouragement and
scientific counsel which he has so generously given me during the
progress of my work in New Guinea.
B. M.
El Boquin,
Icod de los Vinos,
Tenerife.
April, .
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
It is in the nature of the research, that an Ethnographer has to rely
upon the assistance of others to an extent much greater than is the
case with other scientific workers. I have therefore to express in
this special place my obligations to the many who have helped me. As
said in the Preface, financially I owe most to Mr. Robert Mond, who
made my work possible by bestowing on me the Robert Mond Travelling
Scholarship (University of London) of £ per annum for five years
(for and for -). I was substantially helped by a grant
of £ from the Home and Territories Department of Australia,
obtained by the good offices of Mr. Atlee Hunt, C.M.G. The London
School of Economics awarded me the Constance Hutchinson Scholarship
of £ yearly for two years, -. Professor Seligman, to
whom in this, as in other matters I owe so much, besides helping
me in obtaining all the other grants, gave himself £ towards the
cost of the expedition and equipped me with a camera, a phonograph,
anthropometric instruments and other paraphernalia of ethnographic
work. I went out to Australia with the British Association for the
Advancement of Science in , as a guest, and at the expense,
of the Commonwealth Government of Australia.
It may be interesting for intending field-workers to observe
that I carried out my ethnographic research for six years-- to
--making three expeditions to the field of my work, and devoting
the intervals between expeditions to the working out of my material and
to the study of special literature, on little more than £ a year. I
defrayed out of this, not only all the expenses of travel and research,
such as fares, wages to native servants, payments of interpreters, but
I was also able to collect a fair amount of ethnographic specimens,
of which part has been presented to the Melbourne Museum as the
Robert Mond Collection. This would not have been possible for me,
had I not received much help from residents in New Guinea. My friend,
Mr. B. Hancock, of Gusaweta, Trobriand Islands, allowed me to use his
house and store as base for my gear and provisions; he lent me his
cutter on various occasions and provided me with a home, where I could
always repair in need or sickness. He helped me in my photographic
work, and gave me a good number of his own photographic plates,
of which several are reproduced in this book (Plates XI, XXXVII,
and L-LII).
Other pearl traders and buyers of the Trobriands were also very kind
to me, especially M. and Mme. Raphael Brudo, of Paris, Messrs. C. and
G. Auerbach, and the late Mr. Mick George, all of whom helped me in
various ways and extended to me their kind hospitality.
In my interim studies in Melbourne, I received much help from the
staff of the excellent Public Library of Victoria, for which I have to
thank the Librarian, Mr. E. La Touche Armstrong, my friend Mr. E. Pitt,
Mr. Cooke and others.
Two maps and two plates are reproduced by kind permission of Professor
Seligman from his "Melanesians of British New Guinea." I have to thank
the Editor of Man (Captain T. A. Joyce) for his permission to use
here again the plates which were previously published in that paper.
Mr. William Swan Stallybrass, Senior Managing Director of
Messrs. Geo. Routledge & Sons, Ltd., has spared no trouble in meeting
all my wishes as to scientific details in the publication of this book,
for which I wish to express my sincere thanks.
PHONETIC NOTE.
The native names and words in this book are written according to
the simple rules, recommended by the Royal Geographical Society
and the Royal Anthropological Institute. That is, the vowels are to
be pronounced as in Italian and the consonants as in English. This
spelling suits the sounds of the Melanesian languages of New Guinea
sufficiently well. The apostrophe placed between two vowels indicates
that they should be pronounced separately and not merged into a
diphthong. The accent is almost always on the penultimate, rarely on
the anti-penultimate. All the syllables must be pronounced clearly
and distinctly.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Preface by Sir James Frazer vii
Foreword by the Author xv
Introduction: The Subject, Method and Scope of This Enquiry
I--Sailing, and trading in the South Seas; the Kula. II--Method
in Ethnography. III--Starting field work. Some perplexing
difficulties. Three conditions of success. IV--Life in a
tent among the natives. Mechanism of "getting in touch" with
them. V--Active methods of research. Order and consistency
in savage cultures. Methodological consequences of this
truth. VI--Formulating the principles of tribal constitution
and of the anatomy of culture. Method of inference from
statistic accumulation of concrete data. Uses of synoptic
charts. VII--Presentation of the intimate touches of native
life; of types of behaviour. Method of systematic fixing of
impressions; of detailed, consecutive records. Importance
of personal participation in native life. VIII--Recording of
stereotyped manners of thinking and feeling. Corpus inscriptionum
Kiriwiniensium. IX--Summary of argument. The native's vision of
his world
I The Country and Inhabitants of the Kula District
I--Racial divisions in Eastern New Guinea. Seligman's
classification. The Kula natives. II--Sub-divisions of the Kula
district. III--Scenery at the Eastern end of New Guinea. Villages
of the S. Massim; their customs and social institutions. IV--The
d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago. The tribes of Dobu. The mythological
associations of their country. Some of their customs and
institutions. Sorcery. A vision on Sarubwoyna beach. V--Sailing
North. The Amphlett Group. Savage monopolists
II The Natives of the Trobriand Islands
I--Arrival in the coral Islands. First impression of
the native. Some significant appearances and their deeper
meaning. II--Position of women; their life and conduct before
and after marriage. III--Further exploration in the villages. A
cross country walk. Gardens and gardening. IV--The native's
working power; their motives and incentives to work. Magic and
work. A digression on Primitive Economics. V--Chieftainship:
power through wealth; a plutocratic community. List of the various
provinces and political divisions in the Trobriands. VI--Totemism,
the solidarity of clans and the bonds of kinship. VII--Spirits of
the dead. The overweening importance of magic. Black magic. The
prowling sorcerers and the flying witches. The malevolent visitors
from the South, and epidemics. VIII--The Eastern neighbours of
the Trobrianders. The remaining districts of the Kula
III The Essentials of the Kula
I--A concise definition of the Kula. II--Its economic
character. III--The articles exchanged; the conception of
vaygu'a. IV--The main rules and aspects of the Kula: the
sociological aspect (partnership); direction of movement; nature
of Kula ownership; the differential and integral effect of these
rules. V--The act of exchange; its regulations; the light it throws
on the acquisitive and "communistic" tendencies of the natives;
its concrete outlines; the sollicitory gifts. VI--The associated
activities and the secondary aspects of the Kula: construction
of canoes; subsidiary trade--their true relation to the Kula;
the ceremonial, mythology and magic associated with the Kula; the
mortuary taboos and distributions, in their relation to the Kula
IV Canoes and Sailing
I--The value and importance of a canoe to a native. Its
appearance, the impressions and emotions it arouses in those
who use or own it. The atmosphere of romance which surrounds
it for the native. II--Analysis of its construction, in
relation to its function. The three types of canoes in
the Trobriand Islands. III--V--Sociology of a large canoe
(masawa). III--(A)--Social organisation of labour in constructing
a canoe; the division of functions; the magical regulation of
work. IV--(B)--Sociology of canoe ownership; the toli-relationship;
the toliwaga, "master" or "owner" of a canoe; the four privileges
and functions of a toliwaga. V--(C)--The social division of
functions in manning and sailing a canoe. Statistical data about
the Trobriand shipping
V The Ceremonial Building of a Waga
I--Construction of canoes as part of the Kula proceedings. Magic
and mythology. The preparatory and the ceremonial stage of
construction. II--The first stage: expelling the wood-sprite
Tokway; transport of the log; the hollowing-out of the log and
the associated magic. III--The second stage: the inaugural rite
of Kula magic; the native at grips with problems of construction;
the wayugo creeper; the magical spell uttered over it; caulking;
the three magical exorcisms. IV--Some general remarks about the two
stages of canoe-building and the concomitant magic. Bulubwalata
(evil magic) of canoes. The ornamental prow-boards. The Dobuan
and the Muruwan types of overseas canoe
VI Launching of a Canoe and Ceremonial Visiting--Tribal Economics in
the Trobriands
I--The procedure and magic at launching. The trial run
(tasasoria). Account of the launching and tasasoria seen on the
beach of Kualukuba. Reflections on the decay of customs under
European influence. II--Digression on the sociology of work:
organisation of labour; forms of communal labour; payment for
work. III--The custom of ceremonial visiting (kabigidoya);
local trade, done on such expeditions. IV--VII--Digression
on gifts, payments, and exchange. IV--Attitude of the native
towards wealth. Desire of display. Enhancement of social
prestige through wealth. The motives of accumulating food
stuffs. The vilamalya (magic of plenty). The handling of
yams. Psychology of eating. Value of manufactured goods,
psychologically analysed. V--Motives for exchange. Giving, as
satisfaction of vanity and as display of power. Fallacy of the
"economically isolated individual" or "household." Absence of
gain in exchange. VI--Exchange of gifts and barter. List of gifts,
payments and commercial transactions: . Pure gifts; . customary
payments, repaid irregularly and without strict equivalents;
. payments for services rendered; . gifts returned in strictly
equivalent form; . exchange of material goods against privileges,
titles and non-material possessions; . ceremonial barter with
deferred payment; . trade pure and simple. VII--Economic duties
corresponding to various social ties; table of eight classes
of social relationship, characterised by definite economic
obligations
VII The Departure of an Overseas Expedition
Scene laid in Sinaketa. The local chiefs. Stir in the village.
The social differentiation of the sailing party. Magical rites,
associated with the preparing and loading of a canoe. The
sulumwoya rite. The magical bundle (lilava). The compartments
of a canoe and the gebobo spell. Farewells on the beach
VIII The First Halt of the Fleet on Muwa
I--The definition of an uvalaku (ceremonial, competitive
expedition). II--The sagali (ceremonial distribution) on
Muwa. III--The magic of sailing
IX Sailing on the Sea-arm of Pilolu
I--The landscape. Mythological geography of the regions
beyond. II--Sailing: the winds; navigation; technique of
sailing a canoe and its dangers. III--The customs and taboos
of sailing. Privileged position of certain sub-clans. IV--The
beliefs in dreadful monsters lurking in the sea
X The Story of Shipwreck
I--The flying witches, mulukwausi or yoyova: essentials of
the belief; initiation and education of a yoyova (witch);
secrecy surrounding this condition; manner of practising this
witch-craft; actual cases. II--The flying witches at sea and
in ship-wreck. Other dangerous agents. The kayga'u magic; its
modes of operation. III--Account of the preparatory rites of
kayga'u. Some incantations quoted. IV--The story of ship-wreck
and rescue. V--The spell of the rescuing giant fish. The myth
and the magical formula of Tokulubwaydoga.
XI In the Amphletts--Sociology of the Kula
I--Arrival in Gumasila. Example of a Kula conversation.
Trobrianders on long visits in the Amphletts. II--Sociology of
the Kula: . sociological limitations to participation in the
Kula; . relation of partnership; . entering the Kula
relationship; . participation of women in the Kula. III--The
Natives of the Amphletts: their industries and trade; pottery;
importing the clay; technology of pot-making; commercial
relations with the surrounding districts. IV--Drift of
migrations and cultural influences in this province
XII In Tewara and Sanaroa--Mythology of the Kula
I--Sailing under the lee of Koytabu. The cannibals of the
unexplored jungle. Trobriand traditions and legends about
them. The history and song of Gumagabu. II--Myths and reality:
significance imparted to landscape by myth; line of distinction
between the mythical and the actual occurrences; magical
power and mythical atmosphere; the three strata of Trobriand
myths. III--V--The myths of the Kula. III--Survey of Kula mythology
and its geographical distribution. The story of Gere'u of Muyuwa
(Woodlark Island). The two stories of Tokosikuna of Digumenu and
Gumasila. IV--The Kudayuri myth of the flying canoe. Commentary
and analysis of this myth. Association between the canoe and the
flying witches. Mythology and the Lukuba clan. V--The myth of
Kasabwaybwayreta and the necklace Gumakarakedakeda. Comparison of
these stories. VI--Sociological analysis of the myths. influence
of the Kula myths upon native outlook; myth and custom. VII--The
relation between myth and actuality restated. VIII--The story,
the natural monuments and the religious ceremonial of the
mythical personalities Atu'a'ine, Aturamo'a and their sister
Sinatemubadiye'i. Other rocks of similar traditional nature
XIII On the Beach of Sarubwoyna
I--The halt on the Beach. The beauty magic. Some incantations
quoted. The spell of the ta'uya (conch shell). II--The magical
onset on the Koya. Psychological analysis of this magic.
III--The Gwara (taboo) and the Ka'ubana'i spell
XIV The Kula in Dobu--Technicalities of the Exchange
I--Reception in Dobu. II--The main transactions of the Kula and
the subsidiary gifts and exchanges: some general reflections on
the driving force of the Kula; regulations of the main transaction
vaga (opening gift) and yotile (return gift); the sollicitory gifts
(pokala, kwaypolu, kaributu, korotomna); intermediary gifts (basi)
and final clinching gift (kudu); the other articles sometimes
exchanged in the main transaction of the Kula (doga, samakupa,
beku); commercial honour and ethics of the Kula. III--The Kula
proceedings in Dobu: wooing the partner; kwoygapani magic;
the subsidiary trade; roamings of the Boyowans in the Dobu
district
XV The Journey Home--The Fishing and Working of the Kaloma Shell
I--Visits made on the return trip. Some articles acquired. II--The
spondylus shell fishing in Sanaroa lagoon and in home waters: its
general character and magic; the Kaloma myth; consecutive account
of the technicalities, ceremonial and magic of the diving for the
shell. III--Technology, economics and sociology of the production
of the discs and necklaces from the shell. IV--Tanarere, display
of the haul. Arrival of the party home to Sinaketa
XVI The Return Visit of the Dobuans to Sinaketa
I--The uvalaku (ceremonial expedition) from Dobu to Southern
Boyowa: the preparations in Dobu and Sanaroa; preparations in
Gumasila; the excitement, the spreading and convergence of news;
arrival of the Dobuan fleet in Nabwageta. II--Preparations
in Sinaketa for the reception of the visiting party. The
Dobuans arrive. The scene at Kaykuyawa point. The ceremonial
reception. Speeches and gifts. The three days' sojourn of the
Dobuans in Sinaketa. Manner of living. Exchange of gifts and
barter. III--Return home. Results shown at the tanarere
XVII Magic and the Kula
I--The subject matter of Boyowan magic. Its association with
all the vital activities and with the unaccountable aspects of
reality. II--V--The native conception of magic. II--The methods of
arriving at its knowledge. III--Native views about the original
sources of magic. Its primeval character. Inadmissibility
to the native of spontaneous generation in magic. Magic a
power of man and not a force of nature. Magic and myth and
their super-normal atmosphere. IV--The magical acts: spell
and rite; relation between these two factors; spells uttered
directly without a concomitant rite; spells accompanied by
simple rite of impregnation; spells accompanied by a rite of
transference; spells accompanied by offerings and invocations;
summary of this survey. V--Place where magic is stored in
the human anatomy. VI--Condition of the performer. Taboos
and observances. Sociological position. Actual descent and
magical filiation. VII--Definition of systematic magic. The
"systems" of canoe magic and Kula magic. VIII--Supernormal or
supernatural character of magic; emotional reaction of the natives
to certain forms of magic; the kariyala (magical portent); rôle of
ancestral spirits; native terminology. IX--Ceremonial setting of
magic. X--Institution of taboo, supported by magic. Kaytubutabu
and kaytapaku. XI--Purchase of certain forms of magic. Payments
for magical services. XII--Brief summary
XVIII The Power of Words in Magic--Some Linguistic Data
I--Study of linguistic data in magic to throw light on native
ideas about the power of words. II--The text of the wayugo spell
with literal translation. III--Linguistic analysis of its u'ula
(exordium). IV--Vocal technique of reciting a spell. Analysis
of the tapwana (main part) and dogina (final part). V--The text
of the Sulumwoya spell and its analysis. VI--XII--Linguistic
data referring to the other spells mentioned in this volume and
some general inferences. VI--The tokway spell and the opening
phrases of the canoe spells. VII--The tapwana (main parts)
of the canoe spells. VIII--The end parts (dogina) of these
spells. IX--The u'ula of the mwasila spells. X--The tapwana and
the dogina of these spells. XI--The kayga'u spells. XII--Summary
of the results of this linguistic survey. XIII--Substances
used in these magical rites. XIV--XVIII--Analysis of some
non-magical linguistic texts, to illustrate ethnographic
method and native way of thinking. XIV--General remarks about
certain aspects of method. XV--Text No. , its literal and free
translation. XVI--Commentary. XVII--Texts No. and translated
and commented upon
XIX The Inland Kula
I--To'uluwa, the chief of Kiriwina, on a visit in Sinaketa. The
decay of his power. Some melancholy reflections about the folly
of destroying the native order of things and of undermining
native authority as now prevailing. II--The division into "Kula
communities;" the three types of Kula, with respect to this
division. The overseas Kula. III--The inland Kula between two "Kula
communities" and within such a unit. IV--The "Kula communities"
in Boyowa (Trobriand Islands)
XX Expeditions Between Kiriwina and Kitava
I, II--Account of an expedition from Kiriwina to Kitava. I--Fixing
dates and preparing districts. II--Preliminaries of the
journey. Departure from Kaulukuba Beach. Sailing. Analogies and
differences between these expeditions and those of the Sinaketans
to Dobu. Entering the village. The youlawada custom. Sojourn in
Kitava and return. III--The So'i (mortuary feast) in the Eastern
district (Kitava to Muyuwa) and its association with the Kula
XXI The Remaining Branches and Offshoots of the Kula
I--Rapid survey of the routes between Woodlark Island (Murua
or Muyuwa) and the Engineer group and between this latter
and Dobu. II--The ordinary trade carried on between these
communities. III--An offshoot of the Kula; trading expeditions
between the Western Trobriand (Kavataria and Kayleula)
and the Western d'Entrecasteaux. IV--Production of mwali
(armshells). V--Some other offshoots and leakages of the Kula
ring. Entry of the Kula vaygu'a into the Ring.
XXII The Meaning of the Kula
Index
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
A ceremonial act of the kula Frontispiece
Plate Facing page
I The ethnographer's tent on the beach of
Nu'agasi
II The chief's lisiga (personal hut) in Omarakana
III Street of Kasana'i (in Kiriwina, Trobriand
Island)
IV Scene in Yourawotu (Trobriands)
V Scenes on the beach of Silosilo (Southern
Massim district)
VI Village scenes during a so'i feast
VII In the Amphletts
VIII Group of natives in the village of Tukwa'ukwa
IX Men of rank from Kiriwina
X Fishermen from Teyava
XI A typical nakubukwabuya (unmarried woman)
XII Boyowan girls
XIII Kaydebu dance
XIV Dancers in full decoration
XV A family group
XVI Armshells
XVII Two men wearing armshells
XVIII Two necklaces, made of red spondylus discs
XIX Two women adorned with necklaces
XX A Kula gathering on the beach of Sinaketa
XXI A masawa canoe
XXII Putting a canoe into its hangar
XXIII Canoe under sail
XXIV The fishing canoe (kalipoulo)
XXV The dug-out in the village
XXVI Carving a tabuyo
XXVII Construction of a waga
XXVIII Sail making
XXIX Rolls of dried pandanus leaf
XXX Launching of a canoe
XXXI The tasasoria on the beach of Kaulukuba
XXXII A chief's yam-house in Kasana'i
XXXIII Filling a yam-house in Yalumugwa
XXIV Display of pigs and yams at a distribution
(sagali)
XXXV Communal cooking of mona (taro dumplings)
XXXVI Scene in the wasi (ceremonial exchange of
vegetables for fish)
XXXVII Vava, direct barter of vegetables for fish
XXXVIII Koutau'ya, one of the chiefs of Sinaketa
XXXIX A loaded canoe
XL A waga sailing on a Kula expedition
XLI The rigging of a canoe
XLII Scenery in the Amphletts
XLIII Landing in the main village of Gumasila
XLIV Technology of pot-making (I)
XLV Technology of pot-making (II)
XLVI Fine specimens of Amphlett pots
XLVII A canoe in Gumasila loading pots
XLVIII A Kula fleet halting to perform the final
rites of mwasila
XLIX The beauty magic of the mwasila
L (A) Working the kaloma shell (I)
L (B) working the kaloma shell (II)
LI Working the kaloma shell (III)
LII Working the kaloma shell (IV)
LIII On the beach of Nabwageta
LIV The Dobuan canoes pulled up on Sinaketa beach
LV Some canoes moored on the shallow lagoon near
the shore
LVI Dobuan visitors in Sinaketa
LVII A magical spell associated with pregnancy
LVIII A rite of war magic
LIX A rite of garden magic
LX Armshells brought from Kitava
LXI Bringing in a soulava
LXII Offering the soulava
LXIII Ceremonial destruction during a so'i feast
LXIV Nagega canoe
LXV A corpse covered with valuables
MAPS
I Eastern New Guinea xxxiii
II Racial distribution in Eastern New Guinea
III The Kula district
IV The Trobriand archipelago
V The Kula ring
TABLES
I Chronological list of Kula events witnessed by
the writer
II Time-table of the uvalaku expedition, Dobu to
Sinaketa,
III Table of Kula magic and of the corresponding
activities -
FIGURES IN TEXT
I Diagram of canoe stability and construction
II Diagrammatic sections of canoes
INTRODUCTION: THE SUBJECT, METHOD AND SCOPE OF THIS INQUIRY
I
The coastal populations of the South Sea Islands, with very few
exceptions, are, or were before their extinction, expert navigators
and traders. Several of them had evolved excellent types of large
sea-going canoes, and used to embark in them on distant trade
expeditions or raids of war and conquest. The Papuo-Melanesians,
who inhabit the coast and the out-lying islands of New Guinea,
are no exception to this rule. In general they are daring sailors,
industrious manufacturers, and keen traders. The manufacturing centres
of important articles, such as pottery, stone implements, canoes, fine
baskets, valued ornaments, are localised in several places, according
to the skill of the inhabitants, their inherited tribal tradition,
and special facilities offered by the district; thence they are traded
over wide areas, sometimes travelling more than hundreds of miles.
Definite forms of exchange along definite trade routes are to be found
established between the various tribes. A most remarkable form of
intertribal trade is that obtaining between the Motu of Port Moresby
and the tribes of the Papuan Gulf. The Motu sail for hundreds of miles
in heavy, unwieldy canoes, called lakatoi, which are provided with the
characteristic crab-claw sails. They bring pottery and shell ornaments,
in olden days, stone blades, to Gulf Papuans, from whom they obtain
in exchange sago and the heavy dug-outs, which are used afterwards
by the Motu for the construction of their lakatoi canoes. []
Further East, on the South coast, there lives the industrious,
sea-faring population of the Mailu, who link the East End of New
Guinea with the central coast tribes by means of annual trading
expeditions. [] Finally, the natives of the islands and archipelagoes,
scattered around the East End, are in constant trading relations with
one another. We possess in Professor Seligman's book an excellent
description of the subject, especially of the nearer trades routes
between the various islands inhabited by the Southern Massim. []
There exists, however, another, a very extensive and highly complex
trading system, embracing with its ramifications, not only the islands
near the East End, but also the Louisiades, Woodlark Island, the
Trobriand Archipelago, and the d'Entrecasteaux group; it penetrates
into the mainland of New Guinea, and exerts an indirect influence over
several outlying districts, such as Rossel Island, and some parts of
the Northern and Southern coast of New Guinea. This trading system,
the Kula, is the subject I am setting out to describe in this volume,
and it will be seen that it is an economic phenomenon of considerable
theoretical importance. It looms paramount in the tribal life of
those natives who live within its circuit, and its importance is
fully realised by the tribesmen themselves, whose ideas, ambitions,
desires and vanities are very much bound up with the Kula.
II
Before proceeding to the account of the Kula, it will be well to
give a description of the methods used in the collecting of the
ethnographic material. The results of scientific research in any branch
of learning ought to be presented in a manner absolutely candid and
above board. No one would dream of making an experimental contribution
to physical or chemical science, without giving a detailed account
of all the arrangements of the experiments; an exact description
of the apparatus used; of the manner in which the observations were
conducted; of their number; of the length of time devoted to them,
and of the degree of approximation with which each measurement was
made. In less exact sciences, as in biology or geology, this cannot
be done as rigorously, but every student will do his best to bring
home to the reader all the conditions in which the experiment or the
observations were made. In Ethnography, where a candid account of such
data is perhaps even more necessary, it has unfortunately in the past
not always been supplied with sufficient generosity, and many writers
do not ply the full searchlight of methodic sincerity, as they move
among their facts and produce them before us out of complete obscurity.
It would be easy to quote works of high repute, and with a scientific
hall-mark on them, in which wholesale generalisations are laid down
before us, and we are not informed at all by what actual experiences
the writers have reached their conclusion. No special chapter or
paragraph is devoted to describing to us the conditions under which
observations were made and information collected. I consider that
only such ethnographic sources are of unquestionable scientific
value, in which we can clearly draw the line between, on the one
hand, the results of direct observation and of native statements
and interpretations, and on the other, the inferences of the author,
based on his common sense and psychological insight. [] Indeed, Some
such survey, as that contained in the table, given below (Div. VI of
this chapter) ought to be forthcoming, so that at a glance the reader
could estimate with precision the degree of the writer's personal
acquaintance with the facts which he describes, and form an idea
under what conditions information had been obtained from the natives.
Again, in historical science, no one could expect to be seriously
treated if he made any mystery of his sources and spoke of the past
as if he knew it by divination. In Ethnography, the writer is his own
chronicler and the historian at the same time, while his sources are no
doubt easily accessible, but also supremely elusive and complex; they
are not embodied in fixed, material documents, but in the behaviour
and in the memory of living men. In Ethnography, the distance is
often enormous between the brute material of information--as it is
presented to the student in his own observations, in native statement,
in the kaleidoscope of tribal life--and the final authoritative
presentation of the results. The Ethnographer has to traverse this
distance in the laborious years between the moment when he sets foot
upon a native beach, and makes his first attempts to get into touch
with the natives, and the time when he writes down the final version
of his results. A brief outline of an Ethnographer's tribulations,
as lived through by myself, may throw more light on the question,
than any long abstract discussion could do.
III
Imagine yourself suddenly set down surrounded by all your gear,
alone on a tropical beach close to a native village, while the launch
or dinghy which has brought you sails away out of sight. Since you
take up your abode in the compound of some neighbouring white man,
trader or missionary, you have nothing to do, but to start at once
on your ethnographic work. Imagine further that you are a beginner,
without previous experience, with nothing to guide you and no one to
help you. For the white man is temporarily absent, or else unable or
unwilling to waste any of his time on you. This exactly describes my
first initiation into field work on the south coast of New Guinea. I
well remember the long visits I paid to the villages during the first
weeks; the feeling of hopelessness and despair after many obstinate
but futile attempts had entirely failed to bring me into real touch
with the natives, or supply me with any material. I had periods of
despondency, when I buried myself in the reading of novels, as a man
might take to drink in a fit of tropical depression and boredom.
Imagine yourself then, making your first entry into the village, alone
or in company with your white cicerone. Some natives flock round you,
especially if they smell tobacco. Others, the more dignified and
elderly, remain seated where they are. Your white companion has his
routine way of treating the natives, and he neither understands, nor is
very much concerned with the manner in which you, as an ethnographer,
will have to approach them. The first visit leaves you with a hopeful
feeling that when you return alone, things will be easier. Such was
my hope at least.
I came back duly, and soon gathered an audience around me. A few
compliments in pidgin-English on both sides, some tobacco changing
hands, induced an atmosphere of mutual amiability. I tried then to
proceed to business. First, to begin with subjects which might arouse
no suspicion, I started to "do" technology. A few natives were engaged
in manufacturing some object or other. It was easy to look at it and
obtain the names of the tools, and even some technical expressions
about the proceedings, but there the matter ended. It must be borne
in mind that pidgin-English is a very imperfect instrument for
expressing one's ideas, and that before one gets a good training in
framing questions and understanding answers one has the uncomfortable
feeling that free communication in it with the natives will never be
attained; and I was quite unable to enter into any more detailed or
explicit conversation with them at first. I knew well that the best
remedy for this was to collect concrete data, and accordingly I took
a village census, wrote down genealogies, drew up plans and collected
the terms of kinship. But all this remained dead material, which led no
further into the understanding of real native mentality or behaviour,
since I could neither procure a good native interpretation of any of
these items, nor get what could be called the hang of tribal life. As
to obtaining their ideas about religion, and magic, their beliefs in
sorcery and spirits, nothing was forthcoming except a few superficial
items of folk-lore, mangled by being forced into pidgin-English.
Information which I received from some white residents in the district,
valuable as it was in itself, was more discouraging than anything else
with regard to my own work. Here were men who had lived for years
in the place with constant opportunities of observing the natives
and communicating with them, and who yet hardly knew one thing about
them really well. How could I therefore in a few months or a year,
hope to overtake and go beyond them? Moreover, the manner in which
my white informants spoke about the natives and put their views was,
naturally, that of untrained minds, unaccustomed to formulate their
thoughts with any degree of consistency and precision. And they
were for the most part, naturally enough, full of the biassed and
pre-judged opinions inevitable in the average practical man, whether
administrator, missionary, or trader; yet so strongly repulsive to
a mind striving after the objective, scientific view of things. The
habit of treating with a self-satisfied frivolity what is really
serious to the ethnographer; the cheap rating of what to him is a
scientific treasure, that is to say, the native's cultural and mental
peculiarities and independence--these features, so well known in the
inferior amateur's writing, I found in the tone of the majority of
white residents. []
Indeed, in my first piece of Ethnographic research on the South coast,
it was not until I was alone in the district that I began to make
some headway; and, at any rate, I found out where lay the secret of
effective field-work. What is then this ethnographer's magic, by which
he is able to evoke the real spirit of the natives, the true picture
of tribal life? As usual, success can only be obtained by a patient
and systematic application of a number of rules of common sense and
well-known scientific principles, and not by the discovery of any
marvellous short-cut leading to the desired results without effort
or trouble. The principles of method can be grouped under three
main headings; first of all, naturally, the student must possess
real scientific aims, and know the values and criteria of modern
ethnography. Secondly, he ought to put himself in good conditions of
work, that is, in the main, to live without other white men, right
among the natives. Finally, he has to apply a number of special
methods of collecting, manipulating and fixing his evidence. A few
words must be said about these three foundation stones of fieldwork,
beginning with the second as the most elementary.
IV
Proper conditions for ethnographic work. These, as said, consist
mainly in cutting oneself off from the company of other white men,
and remaining in as close contact with the natives as possible,
which really can only be achieved by camping right in their villages
(see Plates I and II). It is very nice to have a base in a white man's
compound for the stores, and to know there is a refuge there in times
of sickness and surfeit of native. But it must be far enough away
not to become a permanent milieu in which you live and from which
you emerge at fixed hours only to "do the village." It should not
even be near enough to fly to at any moment for recreation. For the
native is not the natural companion for a white man, and after you
have been working with him for several hours, seeing how he does his
gardens, or letting him tell you items of folk-lore, or discussing
his customs, you will naturally hanker after the company of your own
kind. But if you are alone in a village beyond reach of this, you go
for a solitary walk for an hour or so, return again and then quite
naturally seek out the natives' society, this time as a relief from
loneliness, just as you would any other companionship. And by means
of this natural intercourse, you learn to know him, and you become
familiar with his customs and beliefs far better than when he is a
paid, and often bored, informant.
There is all the difference between a sporadic plunging into the
company of natives, and being really in contact with them. What does
this latter mean? On the Ethnographer's side, it means that his life
in the village, which at first is a strange, sometimes unpleasant,
sometimes intensely interesting adventure, soon adopts quite a natural
course very much in harmony with his surroundings.
Soon after I had established myself in Omarakana (Trobriand Islands),
I began to take part, in a way, in the village life, to look forward
to the important or festive events, to take personal interest in the
gossip and the developments of the small village occurrences; to wake
up every morning to a day, presenting itself to me more or less as
it does to the native. I would get out from under my mosquito net,
to find around me the village life beginning to stir, or the people
well advanced in their working day according to the hour and also to
the season, for they get up and begin their labours early or late,
as work presses. As I went on my morning walk through the village, I
could see intimate details of family life, of toilet, cooking, taking
of meals; I could see the arrangements for the day's work, people
starting on their errands, or groups of men and women busy at some
manufacturing tasks (see Plate III). Quarrels, jokes, family scenes,
events usually trivial, sometimes dramatic but always significant,
formed the atmosphere of my daily life, as well as of theirs. It
must be remembered that as the natives saw me constantly every day,
they ceased to be interested or alarmed, or made self-conscious by
my presence, and I ceased to be a disturbing element in the tribal
life which I was to study, altering it by my very approach, as
always happens with a new-comer to every savage community. In fact,
as they knew that I would thrust my nose into everything, even where
a well-mannered native would not dream of intruding, they finished
by regarding me as part and parcel of their life, a necessary evil
or nuisance, mitigated by donations of tobacco.
Later on in the day, whatever happened was within easy reach, and
there was no possibility of its escaping my notice. Alarms about the
sorcerer's approach in the evening, one or two big, really important
quarrels and rifts within the community, cases of illness, attempted
cures and deaths, magical rites which had to be performed, all these I
had not to pursue, fearful of missing them, but they took place under
my very eyes, at my own doorstep, so to speak (see Plate IV). And it
must be emphasised whenever anything dramatic or important occurs it is
essential to investigate it at the very moment of happening, because
the natives cannot but talk about it, are too excited to be reticent,
and too interested to be mentally lazy in supplying details. Also,
over and over again, I committed breaches of etiquette, which the
natives, familiar enough with me, were not slow in pointing out. I
had to learn how to behave, and to a certain extent, I acquired "the
feeling" for native good and bad manners. With this, and with the
capacity of enjoying their company and sharing some of their games
and amusements, I began to feel that I was indeed in touch with the
natives, and this is certainly the preliminary condition of being
able to carry on successful field work.
V
But the Ethnographer has not only to spread his nets in the right
place, and wait for what will fall into them. He must be an active
huntsman, and drive his quarry into them and follow it up to its most
inaccessible lairs. And that leads us to the more active methods of
pursuing ethnographic evidence. It has been mentioned at the end of
Division III that the Ethnographer has to be inspired by the knowledge
of the most modern results of scientific study, by its principles
and aims. I shall not enlarge upon this subject, except by way of one
remark, to avoid the possibility of misunderstanding. Good training
in theory, and acquaintance with its latest results, is not identical
with being burdened with "preconceived ideas." If a man sets out on an
expedition, determined to prove certain hypotheses, if he is incapable
of changing his views constantly and casting them off ungrudgingly
under the pressure of evidence, needless to say his work will be
worthless. But the more problems he brings with him into the field,
the more he is in the habit of moulding his theories according to
facts, and of seeing facts in their bearing upon theory, the better
he is equipped for the work. Preconceived ideas are pernicious in any
scientific work, but foreshadowed problems are the main endowment of
a scientific thinker, and these problems are first revealed to the
observer by his theoretical studies.
In Ethnology the early efforts of Bastian, Tylor, Morgan, the German
Völkerpsychologen have remoulded the older crude information of
travellers, missionaries, etc., and have shown us the importance
of applying deeper conceptions and discarding crude and misleading
ones. []
The concept of animism superseded that of "fetichism" or
"devil-worship," both meaningless terms. The understanding of
the classificatory systems of relationship paved the way for the
brilliant, modern researches on native sociology in the field-work of
the Cambridge school. The psychological analysis of the German thinkers
has brought forth an abundant crop of most valuable information in
the results obtained by the recent German expeditions to Africa,
South America and the Pacific, while the theoretical works of Frazer,
Durkheim and others have already, and will no doubt still for a long
time inspire field workers and lead them to new results. The field
worker relies entirely upon inspiration from theory. Of course he may
be also a theoretical thinker and worker, and there he can draw on
himself for stimulus. But the two functions are separate, and in actual
research they have to be separated both in time and conditions of work.
As always happens when scientific interest turns towards and begins
to labour on a field so far only prospected by the curiosity of
amateurs, Ethnology has introduced law and order into what seemed
chaotic and freakish. It has transformed for us the sensational, wild
and unaccountable world of "savages" into a number of well ordered
communities, governed by law, behaving and thinking according to
consistent principles. The word "savage," whatever association it
might have had originally, connotes ideas of boundless liberty, of
irregularity, of something extremely and extraordinarily quaint. In
popular thinking, we imagine that the natives live on the bosom of
Nature, more or less as they can and like, the prey of irregular,
phantasmagoric beliefs and apprehensions. Modern science, on the
contrary, shows that their social institutions have a very definite
organisation, that they are governed by authority, law and order
in their public and personal relations, while the latter are,
besides, under the control of extremely complex ties of kinship
and clanship. Indeed, we see them entangled in a mesh of duties,
functions and privileges which correspond to an elaborate tribal,
communal and kinship organisation (see Plate IV). Their beliefs and
practices do not by any means lack consistency of a certain type,
and their knowledge of the outer world is sufficient to guide them
in many of their strenuous enterprises and activities. Their artistic
productions again lack neither meaning nor beauty.
It is a very far cry from the famous answer given long ago by a
representative authority who, asked, what are the manners and customs
of the natives, answered, "Customs none, manners beastly," to the
position of the modern Ethnographer! This latter, with his tables
of kinship terms, genealogies, maps, plans and diagrams, proves an
extensive and big organisation, shows the constitution of the tribe,
of the clan, of the family; and he gives us a picture of the natives
subjected to a strict code of behaviour and good manners, to which
in comparison the life at the Court of Versailles or Escurial was
free and easy. []
Thus the first and basic ideal of ethnographic field-work is to
give a clear and firm outline of the social constitution, and
disentangle the laws and regularities of all cultural phenomena
from the irrelevances. The firm skeleton of the tribal life has
to be first ascertained. This ideal imposes in the first place the
fundamental obligation of giving a complete survey of the phenomena,
and not of picking out the sensational, the singular, still less
the funny and quaint. The time when we could tolerate accounts
presenting us the native as a distorted, childish caricature of
a human being are gone. This picture is false, and like many other
falsehoods, it has been killed by Science. The field Ethnographer has
seriously and soberly to cover the full extent of the phenomena in
each aspect of tribal culture studied, making no difference between
What is commonplace, or drab, or ordinary, and what strikes him as
astonishing and out-of-the-way. At the same time, the whole area of
tribal culture in all its aspects has to be gone over in research. The
consistency, the law and order which obtain within each aspect make
also for joining them into one coherent whole.
An Ethnographer who sets out to study only religion, or only
technology, or only social organisation cuts out an artificial field
for inquiry, and he will be seriously handicapped in his work.
VI
Having settled this very general rule, let us descend to more detailed
consideration of method. The Ethnographer has in the field, according
to what has just been said, the duty before him of drawing up all
the rules and regularities of tribal life; all that is permanent
and fixed; of giving an anatomy of their culture, of depicting the
constitution of their society. But these things, though crystallised
and set, are nowhere formulated. There is no written or explicitly
expressed code of laws, and their whole tribal tradition, the whole
structure of their society, are embodied in the most elusive of all
materials; the human being. But not even in human mind or memory are
these laws to be found definitely formulated. The natives obey the
forces and commands of the tribal code, but they do not comprehend
them; exactly as they obey their instincts and their impulses, but
could not lay down a single law of psychology. The regularities in
native institutions are an automatic result of the interaction of
the mental forces of tradition, and of the material conditions of
environment. Exactly as a humble member of any modern institution,
whether it be the state, or the church, or the army, is of it and
in it, but has no vision of the resulting integral action of the
whole, still less could furnish any account of its organisation,
so it would be futile to attempt questioning a native in abstract,
sociological terms. The difference is that, in our society, every
institution has its intelligent members, its historians, and its
archives and documents, whereas in a native society there are none
of these. After this is realised an expedient has to be found to
overcome this difficulty. This expedient for an Ethnographer consists
in collecting concrete data of evidence, and drawing the general
inferences for himself. This seems obvious on the face of it, but was
not found out or at least practised in Ethnography till field work was
taken up by men of science. Moreover, in giving it practical effect,
it is neither easy to devise the concrete applications of this method,
nor to carry them out systematically and consistently.
Though we cannot ask a native about abstract, general rules, we can
always enquire how a given case would be treated. Thus for instance,
in asking how they would treat crime, or punish it, it would be vain
to put to a native a sweeping question such as, "How do you treat
and punish a criminal?" for even words could not be found to express
it in native, or in pidgin. But an imaginary case, or still better,
a real occurrence, will stimulate a native to express his opinion and
to supply plentiful information. A real case indeed will start the
natives on a wave of discussion, evoke expressions of indignation,
show them taking sides--all of which talk will probably contain a
wealth of definite views, of moral censures, as well as reveal the
social mechanism set in motion by the crime committed. From there,
it will be easy to lead them on to speak of other similar cases,
to remember other actual occurrences or to discuss them in all their
implications and aspects. From this material, which ought to cover
the widest possible range of facts, the inference is obtained by
simple induction. The scientific treatment differs from that of good
common sense, first in that a student will extend the completeness and
minuteness of survey much further and in a pedantically systematic and
methodical manner; and secondly, in that the scientifically trained
mind, will push the inquiry along really relevant lines, and towards
aims possessing real importance. Indeed, the object of scientific
training is to provide the empirical investigator with a mental chart,
in accordance with which he can take his bearings and lay his course.
To return to our example, a number of definite cases discussed will
reveal to the Ethnographer the social machinery for punishment. This
is one part, one aspect of tribal authority. Imagine further that
by a similar method of inference from definite data, he arrives at
understanding leadership in war, in economic enterprise, in tribal
festivities--there he has at once all the data necessary to answer
the questions about tribal government and social authority. In actual
field work, the comparison of such data, the attempt to piece them
together, will often reveal rifts and gaps in the information which
lead on to further investigations.
From my own experience, I can say that, very often, a problem seemed
settled, everything fixed and clear, till I began to write down a
short preliminary sketch of my results. And only then, did I see the
enormous deficiencies, which would show me where lay new problems,
and lead me on to new work. In fact, I spent a few months between my
first and second expeditions, and over a year between that and the
subsequent one, in going over all my material, and making parts of
it almost ready for publication each time, though each time I knew I
would have to re-write it. Such cross-fertilisation of constructive
work and observation, I found most valuable, and I do not think I
could have made real headway without it. I give this bit of my own
history merely to show that what has been said so far is not only an
empty programme, but the result of personal experience. In this volume,
the description is given of a big institution connected with ever so
many associated activities, and presenting many aspects. To anyone who
reflects on the subject, it will be clear that the information about
a phenomenon of such high complexity and of so many ramifications,
could not be obtained with any degree of exactitude and completeness,
without a constant interplay of constructive attempts and empirical
checking. In fact, I have written up an outline of the Kula institution
at least half a dozen times while in the field and in the intervals
between my expeditions. Each time, new problems and difficulties
presented themselves.
The collecting of concrete data over a wide range of facts is thus one
of the main points of field method. The obligation is not to enumerate
a few examples only, but to exhaust as far as possible all the cases
within reach; and, on this search for cases, the investigator will
score most whose mental chart is clearest. But, whenever the material
of the search allows it, this mental chart ought to be transformed
into a real one; it ought to materialise into a diagram, a plan,
an exhaustive, synoptic table of cases. Long since, in all tolerably
good modern books on natives, we expect to find a full list or table
of kinship terms, which includes all the data relative to it, and
does not just pick out a few strange and anomalous relationships
or expressions. In the investigation of kinship, the following up
of one relation after another in concrete cases leads naturally to
the construction of genealogical tables. Practised already by the
best early writers, such as Munzinger, and, if I remember rightly,
Kubary, this method has been developed to its fullest extent in the
works of Dr. Rivers. Again, studying the concrete data of economic
transactions, in order to trace the history of a valuable object, and
to gauge the nature of its circulation, the principle of completeness
and thoroughness would lead to construct tables of transactions,
such as we find in the work of Professor Seligman. [] It is in
following Professor Seligman's example in this matter that I was able
to settle certain of the more difficult and detailed rules of the
Kula. The method of reducing information, if possible, into charts
or synoptic tables ought to be extended to the study of practically
all aspects of native life. All types of economic transactions may
be studied by following up connected, actual cases, and putting them
into a synoptic chart; again, a table ought to be drawn up of all the
gifts and presents customary in a given society, a table including the
sociological, ceremonial, and economic definition of every item. Also,
systems of magic, connected series of ceremonies, types of legal acts,
all could be charted, allowing each entry to be synoptically defined
under a number of headings. Besides this, of course, the genealogical
census of every community, studied more in detail, extensive maps,
plans and diagrams, illustrating ownership in garden land, hunting
and fishing privileges, etc., serve as the more fundamental documents
of ethnographic research.
A genealogy is nothing else but a synoptic chart of a number of
connected relations of kinship. Its value as an instrument of research
consists in that it allows the investigator to put questions which
he formulates to himself in abstracto, but can put concretely to
the native informant. As a document, its value consists in that it
gives a number of authenticated data, presented in their natural
grouping. A synoptic chart of magic fulfils the same function. As
an instrument of research, I have used it in order to ascertain,
for instance, the ideas about the nature of magical power. With a
chart before me, I could easily and conveniently go over one item
after the other, and note down the relevant practices and beliefs
contained in each of them. The answer to my abstract problem could
then be obtained by drawing a general inference from all the cases,
and the procedure is illustrated in Chapters XVII and XVIII. [] I
cannot enter further into the discussion of this question, which would
need further distinctions, such as between a chart of concrete, actual
data, such as is a genealogy, and a chart summarising the outlines
of a custom or belief, as a chart of a magical system would be.
Returning once more to the question of methodological candour,
discussed previously in Division II I wish to point out here, that
the procedure of concrete and tabularised presentation of data ought
to be applied first to the Ethnographer's own credentials. That
is, an Ethnographer, who wishes to be trusted, must show clearly
and concisely, in a tabularised form, which are his own direct
observations, and which the indirect information that form the bases
of his account. The Table on the next page will serve as an example
of this procedure and help the reader of this book to form an idea
of the trustworthiness of any statement he is specially anxious to
check. With the help of this Table and the many references scattered
throughout the text, as to how, under what circumstances, and with what
degree of accuracy I arrived at a given item of knowledge, there will,
I hope remain no obscurity whatever as to the sources of the book.
CHRONOLOGICAL LIST OF KULA EVENTS WITNESSED BY THE WRITER
First Expedition, August, -March, .
March, . In the village of Dikoyas (Woodlark Island) a few
ceremonial offerings seen. Preliminary information obtained.
Second Expedition, May, -May, .
June, . A Kabigidoya visit arrives from Vakuta to Kiriwina. Its
anchoring at Kavataria witnessed and the men seen at Omarakana,
where information collected.
July, . Several parties from Kitava land on the beach of
Kaulukuba. The men examined in Omarakana. Much information
collected in that period.
September, . Unsuccessful attempt to sail to Kitava with
To'uluwa, the chief of Omarakana.
October-November, . Departure noticed of three expeditions
from Kiriwina to Kitava. Each time To'uluwa brings home a haul
of mwali (armshells).
November, -March, . Preparations for a big
overseas expedition from Kiriwina to the Marshall Bennett
Islands. Construction of a canoe; renovating of another;
sail making in Omarakana; launching; tasasoria on the beach of
Kaulukuba. At the same time, information is being obtained about
these and the associated subjects. Some magical texts of canoe
building and Kula magic obtained.
Third Expedition, October, -October, .
November, -December, . Inland Kula; some data obtained
in Tukwaukwa.
December-February, . Parties from Kitava arrive in
Wawela. Collection of information about the yoyova. Magic and
spells of Kaygau obtained.
March, . Preparations in Sanaroa; preparations in the
Amphletts; the Dobuan fleet arrives in the Amphletts. The uvalaku
expedition from Dobu followed to Boyowa.
April, . Their arrival; their reception in Sinaketa; the
Kula transactions; the big intertribal gathering. Some magical
formulæ obtained.
May, . Party from Kitava seen in Vakuta.
June, July, . Information about Kula magic and customs
checked and amplified in Omarakana, especially with regard to
its Eastern branches.
August, September, . Magical texts obtained in Sinaketa.
October, . Information obtained from a number of natives in
Dobu and Southern Massim district (examined in Samarai).
To summarise the first, cardinal point of method, I may say each
phenomenon ought to be studied through the broadest range possible of
its concrete manifestations; each studied by an exhaustive survey of
detailed examples. If possible, the results ought to be embodied into
some sort of synoptic chart, both to be used as an instrument of study,
and to be presented as an ethnological document. With the help of
such documents and such study of actualities the clear outline of the
framework of the natives' culture in the widest sense of the word, and
the constitution of their society, can be presented. This method could
be called the method of statistic documentation by concrete evidence.
VII
Needless to add, in this respect, the scientific field-work is far
above even the best amateur productions. There is, however, one point
in which the latter often excel. This is, in the presentation of
intimate touches of native life, in bringing home to us these aspects
of it with which one is made familiar only through being in close
contact with the natives, one way or the other, for a long period of
time. In certain results of scientific work--especially that which has
been called "survey work"--we are given an excellent skeleton, so to
speak, of the tribal constitution, but it lacks flesh and blood. We
learn much about the framework of their society, but within it,
we cannot perceive or imagine the realities of human life, the even
flow of everyday events, the occasional ripples of excitement over a
feast, or ceremony, or some singular occurrence. In working out the
rules and regularities of native custom, and in obtaining a precise
formula for them from the collection of data and native statements,
we find that this very precision is foreign to real life, which
never adheres rigidly to any rules. It must be supplemented by the
observation of the manner in which a given custom is carried out,
of the behaviour of the natives in obeying the rules so exactly
formulated by the ethnographer, of the very exceptions which in
sociological phenomena almost always occur.
If all the conclusions are solely based on the statements of
informants, or deduced from objective documents, it is of course
impossible to supplement them in actually observed data of real
behaviour. And that is the reason why certain works of amateur
residents of long standing, such as educated traders and planters,
medical men and officials, and last, not least, of the few intelligent
and unbiassed missionaries to whom Ethnography owes so much, this is
the reason why these works surpass in plasticity and in vividness most
of the purely scientific accounts. But if the specialised field-worker
can adopt the conditions of living described above, he is in a far
better position to be really in touch with the natives than any other
white resident. For none of them lives right in a native village,
except for very short periods, and everyone has his own business,
which takes up a considerable part of his time. Moreover, if, like a
trader or a missionary or an official he enters into active relations
with the native, if he has to transform or influence or make use of
him, this makes a real, unbiassed, impartial observation impossible,
and precludes all-round sincerity, at least in the case of the
missionaries and officials.
Living in the village with no other business but to follow native life,
one sees the customs, ceremonies and transactions over and over again,
one has examples of their beliefs as they are actually lived through,
and the full body and blood of actual native life fills out soon the
skeleton of abstract constructions. That is the reason why, working
under such conditions as previously described, the Ethnographer is
enabled to add something essential to the bare outline of tribal
constitution, and to supplement it by all the details of behaviour,
setting and small incident. He is able in each case to state whether
an act is public or private; how a public assembly behaves, and
what it looks like; he can judge whether an event is ordinary or an
exciting and singular one; whether natives bring to it a great deal
of sincere and earnest spirit, or perform it in fun; whether they do
it in a perfunctory manner, or with zeal and deliberation.
In other words, there is a series of phenomena of great importance
which cannot possibly be recorded by questioning or computing
documents, but have to be observed in their full actuality. Let us
call them the imponderabilia of actual life. Here belong such things
as the routine of a man's working day, the details of his care of
the body, of the manner of taking food and preparing it; the tone of
conversational and social life around the village fires, the existence
of strong friendships or hostilities, and of passing sympathies and
dislikes between people; the subtle yet unmistakable manner in which
personal vanities and ambitions are reflected in the behaviour of
the individual and in the emotional reactions of those who surround
him. All these facts can and ought to be scientifically formulated and
recorded, but it is necessary that this be done, not by a superficial
registration of details, as is usually done by untrained observers,
but with an effort at penetrating the mental attitude expressed in
them. And that is the reason why the work of scientifically trained
observers, once seriously applied to the study of this aspect, will,
I believe, yield results of surpassing value. So far, it has been
done only by amateurs, and therefore done, on the whole, indifferently.
Indeed, if we remember that these imponderable yet all important facts
of actual life are part of the real substance of the social fabric,
that in them are spun the innumerable threads which keep together
the family, the clan, the village community, the tribe--their
significance becomes clear. The more crystallised bonds of social
grouping, such as the definite ritual, the economic and legal duties,
the obligations, the ceremonial gifts and formal marks of regard,
though equally important for the student, are certainly felt less
strongly by the individual who has to fulfil them. Applying this to
ourselves, we all know that "family life" means for us, first and
foremost, the atmosphere of home, all the innumerable small acts and
attentions in which are expressed the affection, the mutual interest,
the little preferences, and the little antipathies which constitute
intimacy. That we may inherit from this person, that we shall have to
walk after the hearse of the other, though sociologically these facts
belong to the definition of "family" and "family life," in personal
perspective of what family truly is to us, they normally stand very
much in the background.
Exactly the same applies to a native community, and if the Ethnographer
wants to bring their real life home to his readers, he must on no
account neglect this. Neither aspect, the intimate, as little as
the legal, ought to be glossed over. Yet as a rule in ethnographic
accounts we have not both but either the one or the other--and, so
far, the intimate one has hardly ever been properly treated. In all
social relations besides the family ties, even those between mere
tribesmen and, beyond that, between hostile or friendly members of
different tribes, meeting on any sort of social business, there is
this intimate side, expressed by the typical details of intercourse,
the tone of their behaviour in the presence of one another. This
side is different from the definite, crystalised legal frame of the
relationship, and it has to be studied and stated in its own right.
In the same way, in studying the conspicuous acts of tribal life,
such as ceremonies, rites, festivities, etc., the details and tone of
behaviour ought to be given, besides the bare outline of events. The
importance of this may be exemplified by one instance. Much has
been said and written about survival. Yet the survival character
of an act is expressed in nothing as well as in the concomitant
behaviour, in the way in which it is carried out. Take any example
from our own culture, whether it be the pomp and pageantry of a
state ceremony, or a picturesque custom kept up by street urchins,
its "outline" will not tell you whether the rite flourishes still
with full vigour in the hearts of those who perform it or assist at
the performance or whether they regard it as almost a dead thing,
kept alive for tradition's sake. But observe and fix the data of
their behaviour, and at once the degree of vitality of the act will
become clear. There is no doubt, from all points of sociological,
or psychological analysis, and in any question of theory, the manner
and type of behaviour observed in the performance of an act is of the
highest importance. Indeed behaviour is a fact, a relevant fact, and
one that can be recorded. And foolish indeed and short-sighted would
be the man of science who would pass by a whole class of phenomena,
ready to be garnered, and leave them to waste, even though he did
not see at the moment to what theoretical use they might be put!
As to the actual method of observing and recording in field-work
these imponderabilia of actual life and of typical behaviour, there
is no doubt that the personal equation of the observer comes in here
more prominently, than in the collection of crystalised, ethnographic
data. But here also the main endeavour must be to let facts speak for
themselves. If in making a daily round of the village, certain small
incidents, characteristic forms of taking food, of conversing, of
doing work (see for instance Plate III) are found occurring over and
over again, they should be noted down at once. It is also important
that this work of collecting and fixing impressions should begin
early in the course of working out a district. Because certain subtle
peculiarities, which make an impression as long as they are novel,
cease to be noticed as soon as they become familiar. Others again can
only be perceived with a better knowledge of the local conditions. An
ethnographic diary, carried on systematically throughout the course
of one's work in a district would be the ideal instrument for this
sort of study. And if, side by side with the normal and typical,
the ethnographer carefully notes the slight, or the more pronounced
deviations from it, he will be able to indicate the two extremes
within which the normal moves.
In observing ceremonies or other tribal events, such, for instance as
the scene depicted in Plate IV, it is necessary, not only to note down
those occurrences and details which are prescribed by tradition and
custom to be the essential course of the act, but also the Ethnographer
ought to record carefully and precisely, one after the other, the
actions of the actors and of the spectators. Forgetting for a moment
that he knows and understands the structure of this ceremony, the
main dogmatic ideas underlying it, he might try to find himself only
in the midst of an assembly of human-beings, who behave seriously or
jocularly, with earnest concentration or with bored frivolity, who
are either in the same mood as he finds them every day, or else are
screwed up to a high pitch of excitement, and so on and so on. With his
attention constantly directed to this aspect of tribal life, with the
constant endeavour to fix it, to express it in terms of actual fact,
a good deal of reliable and expressive material finds its way into
his notes. He will be able to "set" the act into its proper place in
tribal life, that is to show whether it is exceptional or commonplace,
one in which the natives behave ordinarily, or one in which their
whole behaviour is transformed. And he will also be able to bring
all this home to his readers in a clear, convincing manner.
Again, in this type of work, it is good for the Ethnographer sometimes
to put aside camera, note book and pencil, and to join in himself
in what is going on. He can take part in the natives' games, he can
follow them on their visits and walks, sit down and listen and share
in their conversations. I am not certain if this is equally easy
for everyone--perhaps the Slavonic nature is more plastic and more
naturally savage than that of Western Europeans--but though the degree
of success varies, the attempt is possible for everyone. Out of such
plunges into the life of the natives--and I made them frequently not
only for study's sake but because everyone needs human company--I
have carried away a distinct feeling that their behaviour, their
manner of being, in all sorts of tribal transactions, became more
transparent and easily understandable than it had been before. All
these methodological remarks, the reader will find again illustrated
in the following chapters.
VIII
Finally, let us pass to the third and last aim of scientific
field-work, to the last type of phenomenon which ought to be recorded
in order to give a full and adequate picture of native culture. Besides
the firm outline of tribal constitution and crystallised cultural
items which form the skeleton, besides the data of daily life and
ordinary behaviour, which are, so to speak, its flesh and blood,
there is still to be recorded the spirit--the natives' views and
opinions and utterances. For, in every act of tribal life, there is,
first, the routine prescribed by custom and tradition, then there
is the manner in which it is carried out, and lastly there is the
commentary to it, contained in the natives' mind. A man who submits
to various customary obligations, who follows a traditional course
of action, does it impelled by certain motives, to the accompaniment
of certain feelings, guided by certain ideas. These ideas, feelings,
and impulses are moulded and conditioned by the culture in which
we find them, and are therefore an ethnic peculiarity of the given
society. An attempt must be made therefore, to study and record them.
But is this possible? Are these subjective states not too elusive and
shapeless? And, even granted that people usually do feel or think
or experience certain psychological states in association with the
performance of customary acts, the majority of them surely are not
able to formulate these states, to put them into words. This latter
point must certainly be granted, and it is perhaps the real Gordian
knot in the study of the facts of social psychology. Without trying to
cut or untie this knot, that is to solve the problem theoretically,
or to enter further into the field of general methodology, I shall
make directly for the question of practical means to overcome some
of the difficulties involved.
First of all, it has to be laid down that we have to study here
stereotyped manners of thinking and feeling. As sociologists, we
are not interested in what A or B may feel qua individuals, in the
accidental course of their own personal experiences--we are interested
only in what they feel and think qua members of a given community. Now
in this capacity, their mental states receive a certain stamp, become
stereotyped by the institutions in which they live, by the influence
of tradition and folk-lore, by the very vehicle of thought, that is
by language. The social and cultural environment in which they move
forces them to think and feel in a definite manner. Thus, a man who
lives in a polyandrous community cannot experience the same feelings
of jealousy, as a strict monogynist, though he might have the elements
of them. A man who lives within the sphere of the Kula cannot become
permanently and sentimentally attached to certain of his possessions,
in spite of the fact that he values them most of all. These examples
are crude, but better ones will be found in the text of this book.
So, the third commandment of field-work runs: Find out the typical
ways of thinking and feeling, corresponding to the institutions and
culture of a given community, and formulate the results in the most
convincing manner. What will be the method of procedure? The best
ethnographical writers--here again the Cambridge school with Haddon,
Rivers, and Seligman rank first among English Ethnographers--have
always tried to quote verbatim statements of crucial importance. They
also adduce terms of native classification; sociological, psychological
and industrial termini technici, and have rendered the verbal contour
of native thought as precisely as possible. One step further in this
line can be made by the Ethnographer, who acquires a knowledge of
the native language and can use it as an instrument of inquiry. In
working in the Kiriwinian language, I found still some difficulty in
writing down the statement directly in translation which at first I
used to do in the act of taking notes. The translation often robbed
the text of all its significant characteristics--rubbed off all its
points--so that gradually I was led to note down certain important
phrases just as they were spoken, in the native tongue. As my knowledge
of the language progressed, I put down more and more in Kiriwinian,
till at last I found myself writing exclusively in that language,
rapidly taking notes, word for word, of each statement. No sooner had
I arrived at this point, than I recognised that I was thus acquiring
at the same time an abundant linguistic material, and a series of
ethnographic documents which ought to be reproduced as I had fixed
them, besides being utilised in the writing up of my account. []
This corpus inscriptionum Kiriwiniensium can be utilised, not only
by myself, but by all those who, through their better penetration
and ability of interpreting them, may find points which escape my
attention, very much as the other corpora form the basis for the
various interpretations of ancient and prehistoric cultures; only,
these ethnographic inscriptions are all decipherable and clear,
have been almost all translated fully and unambiguously, and have
been provided with native cross-commentaries or scholia obtained from
living sources.
No more need be said on this subject here, as later on a whole chapter
(Chapter XVIII) is devoted to it, and to its exemplification by several
native texts. The Corpus will of course be published separately at
a later date.
IX
Our considerations thus indicate that the goal of ethnographic
field-work must be approached through three avenues:
. The organisation of the tribe, and the anatomy of its culture
must be recorded in firm, clear outline. The method of concrete,
statistical documentation is the means through which such an outline
has to be given.
. Within this frame, the imponderabilia of actual life, and the
type of behaviour have to be filled in. They have to be collected
through minute, detailed observations, in the form of some sort of
ethnographic diary, made possible by close contact with native life.
. A collection of ethnographic statements, characteristic narratives,
typical utterances, items of folk-lore and magical formulæ has to be
given as a corpus inscriptionum, as documents of native mentality.
These three lines of approach lead to the final goal, of which an
Ethnographer should never lose sight. This goal is, briefly, to grasp
the native's point of view, his relation to life, to realise his vision
of his world. We have to study man, and we must study what concerns
him most intimately, that is, the hold which life has on him. In
each culture, the values are slightly different; people aspire after
different aims, follow different impulses, yearn after a different
form of happiness. In each culture, we find different institutions
in which man pursues his life-interest, different customs by which he
satisfies his aspirations, different codes of law and morality which
reward his virtues or punish his defections. To study the institutions,
customs, and codes or to study the behaviour and mentality without the
subjective desire of feeling by what these people live, of realising
the substance of their happiness--is, in my opinion, to miss the
greatest reward which we can hope to obtain from the study of man.
These generalities the reader will find illustrated in the following
chapters. We shall see there the savage striving to satisfy certain
aspirations, to attain his type of value, to follow his line of
social ambition. We shall see him led on to perilous and difficult
enterprises by a tradition of magical and heroical exploits, shall
see him following the lure of his own romance. Perhaps as we read
the account of these remote customs there may emerge a feeling of
solidarity with the endeavours and ambitions of these natives. Perhaps
man's mentality will be revealed to us, and brought near, along
some lines which we never have followed before. Perhaps through
realising human nature in a shape very distant and foreign to us,
we shall have some light shed on our own. In this, and in this case
only, we shall be justified in feeling that it has been worth our
while to understand these natives, their institutions and customs,
and that we have gathered some profit from the Kula.