THE COUNTRY AND INHABITANTS OF THE KULA DISTRICT
I
The tribes who live within the sphere of the Kula system of trading
belong, one and all--with the exception perhaps, of the Rossel
Island natives, of whom we know next to nothing--to the same racial
group. These tribes inhabit the easternmost end of the mainland of
New Guinea and those islands, scattered in the form of the long-drawn
archipelago, which continue in the same south-easternly trend as
the mainland, as if to bridge over the gap between New Guinea and
the Solomons.
New Guinea is a mountainous island-continent, very difficult of access
in its interior, and also at certain portions of the coast, where
barrier reefs, swamps and rocks practically prevent landing or even
approach for native craft. Such a country would obviously not offer the
same opportunities in all its parts to the drifting migrations which
in all probability are responsible for the composition of the present
population of the South Seas. The easily accessible portions of the
coast and the outlying islands would certainly offer a hospitable
reception to immigrants of a higher stock; but, on the other hand,
the high hills, the impregnable fastnesses in swampy flats and shores
where landing was difficult and dangerous, would give easy protection
to the aborigines, and discourage the influx of migrators.
The actual distribution of races in New Guinea completely justifies
these hypotheses. Map II shows the Eastern part of the main island
and archipelagoes of New Guinea and the racial distribution of the
natives. The interior of the continent, the low sago swamps and deltas
of the Gulf of Papua--probably the greater part of the North Coast and
of the South-West Coast of New Guinea, are inhabited by a "relatively
tall, dark-skinned, frizzly-haired" race, called by Dr. Seligman
Papuan, and in the hills more especially by pygmy tribes. We know
little about these people, swamp tribes and hill tribes alike, who
probably are the autochtons in this part of the world. [] As we shall
also not meet them in the following account, it will be better to pass
to the tribes who inhabit the accessible parts of New Guinea. "The
Eastern Papuasians, that is, the generally smaller, lighter coloured,
frizzly-haired races of the eastern peninsula of New Guinea and its
archipelagoes now require a name, and since the true Melanesian element
is dominant in them, they may be called Papuo-Melanesians. With regard
to these Eastern Papuasians, Dr. A. C. Haddon first recognised that
they came into the country as the result of a 'Melanesian migration
into New Guinea,' and further, 'That a single wandering would not
account for certain puzzling facts.'" [] The Papuo-Melanesians
again can be divided into two groups, a Western and an Eastern one,
which, following Dr. Seligman's terminology, we shall call the Western
Papuo-Melanesians and the Massim respectively. It is with these latter
we shall become acquainted in the following pages.
If we glance at a map and follow the orographical features of Eastern
New Guinea and its coast line, we see at once that the high main
range of mountains drops off between the th and th meridians,
and again that the fringing reef disappears at the same point,
that is, at the west end of Orangerie Bay. This means that the
extreme East End of New Guinea, with its archipelagoes, in other
words, the Massim country, is the most easily accessible area,
and might be expected to be inhabited by a homogeneous stock of
people, consisting of immigrants almost unmixed with the autochtons
(Cf. Map II). "Indeed, while the condition actually existing in the
Massim area suggests that there was no slow mingling of the invaders
with a previous stock, the geographical features of the territory of
the Western Papuo-Melanesians with its hills, mountains and swamps,
are such that invaders could not have speedily overrun the country,
nor failed to have been influenced by the original inhabitants..." []
I shall assume that the reader is acquainted with the quoted work of
Dr. Seligman, where a thorough account is given of all the main types
of Papuo-Melanesian sociology and culture one after the other. But
the tribes of the Eastern Papuo-Melanesian or Massim area, must be
described here somewhat more in detail, as it is within this fairly
homogeneous area that the Kula takes place. Indeed, the Kula sphere
of influence and the ethnographic area of the Massim tribes almost
completely overlap, and we can speak about the Kula type of culture
and the Massim culture almost synonymously.
II
The adjacent Map III shows the Kula district, that is, the easternmost
end of the main island and the archipelagoes lying to its East
and North-East. As Professor C. G. Seligman says: "This area can
be divided into two parts, a small northern portion comprising the
Trobriands, the Marshall Bennets, the Woodlarks (Murua), as well as
a number of smaller islands such as the Laughlans (Nada), and a far
larger southern portion comprising the remainder of the Massim domain"
(op. cit., p. ).
This division is represented on Map III by the thick line isolating
to the North the Amphletts, the Trobriands, the small Marshall
Bennet Group, Woodlark Island and the Laughlan Group. The Southern
portion, I found convenient to divide further into two divisions
by a vertical line, leaving to the East Misima, Sud-Est Island and
Rossel Island. As our information about this district is extremely
scanty, I have preferred to exclude it from the area of the Southern
Massim. In this excluded area, only the natives of Misima enter into
the Kula, but their participation will play a very small part only in
the following account. The western segment, and this is the part of
which we shall speak as the district of the Southern Massim, comprises
first the East End of the mainland, the few adjacent islands, Sariba,
Roge'a, Side'a, and Basilaki; to the South, the island of Wari, to
the East the important, though small archipelago of Tubetube (Engineer
Group); and to the North, the big archipelago of the d'Entrecasteaux
Islands. From this latter, only one district, that of Dobu, interests
us more specially. The culturally homogeneous tribes of the Southern
Massim have been marked off on our map as district V, the Doubans as
district IV.
Returning to the two main divisions into the Southern and Northern
portion, this latter is occupied by a very homogeneous population,
homogeneous both in language and culture, and in the clear recognition
of their own ethnic unity. To quote further Professor Seligman, it
"is characterised by the absence of cannibalism, which, until put
down by the Government, existed throughout the remaining portion of
the district; another peculiarity of the Northern Massim is their
recognition" in certain districts, though not in all, of chieftains
who wield extensive powers (op. cit. p. ). The natives of that
northern area used to practise--I say used because wars are a thing
of the past--a type of warfare open and chivalrous, very different
from the raids of the Southern Massim. Their villages are built in
big compact blocks, and they have storehouses on piles for storing
food, distinct from their rather miserable dwellings, which stand
directly on the ground and are not raised on piles. As can be seen
on the map, it has been necessary to sub-divide this Northern Massim
further into three groups, first, that of the Trobriand Islanders,
or the Boyowans (the Western Branch); secondly that of the natives
of Woodlark Island and the Marshall Bennets (the Eastern Branch);
and, thirdly, the small group of the Amphlett natives.
The other big sub-division of the Kula tribes is composed of the
Southern Massim, of which, as just said, the western branch mainly
concerns us. These last natives are smaller in stature, and with,
broadly speaking, a much less attractive appearance than those
of the North. [] They live in widely scattered communities,
each house or group of houses standing in its own little grove
of palm and fruit trees, apart from the others. Formerly they were
cannibals and head-hunters, and used to make unexpected raids on their
adversaries. There is no chieftainship, authority being exercised by
the elders in each community. They build very elaborately constructed
and beautifully decorated houses on piles.
I have found it necessary for the purpose of this study to cut out of
the western branch of the southern portion of the Massim the two areas
(marked IV and V on the Map III), as they are of special importance to
the Kula. It must, however, be borne in mind that our present knowledge
does not allow of any final classification of the Southern Massim.
Such are the general characteristics of the Northern and Southern
Massim respectively, given in a few words. But before proceeding with
our subject, it will be good to give a short but more detailed sketch
of each of these tribes. I shall begin with the southernmost section,
following the order in which a visitor, travelling from Port Moresby
with the Mail boat, would come in contact with these districts,
the way indeed in which I received my first impressions of them. My
personal knowledge of the various tribes is, however, very uneven,
based on a long residence among the Trobriand Islanders (District I),
on a month's study of the Amphletts (District III); on a few weeks
spent in Woodlark Island or Murua (District II), the neighbourhood
of Samarai (District V), and the South Coast of New Guinea (also V);
and on three short visits to Dobu (District IV). My knowledge of some
of the remaining localities which enter into the Kula is derived
only from a few conversations I had with natives of this district,
and on second-hand information derived from white residents. The
work of Professor C. G. Seligman, however, supplements my personal
acquaintance in so far as the districts of Tubetube, Woodlark Island,
the Marshall Bennets, and several others are concerned.
The whole account of the Kula will therefore naturally be given
from the perspective, so to speak, of the Trobriand district. This
district is often called in this book by its native name, Boyowa,
and the language is spoken of as Kiriwinian, Kiriwina being the main
province of the district, and its language considered by the natives
as a standard speech. But I may add at once that in studying the
Kula in that part, I ipso facto studied its adjacent branches between
the Trobriands and the Amphletts, between the Trobriands and Kitava,
and between the Trobriands and Dobu; seeing not only the preparations
and departures in Boyowa, but also the arrival of the natives from
other districts, in fact, following one or two of such expeditions
in person. [] Moreover, the Kula being an international affair,
the natives of one tribe know more about Kula customs abroad than
they would about any other subject. And in all its essentials, the
customs and tribal rules of the exchange are identical throughout
the whole Kula area.
III
Let us imagine that we are sailing along the South coast of New
Guinea towards its Eastern end. At about the middle of Orangerie Bay
we arrive at the boundary of the Massim, which runs from this point
north-westwards till it strikes the northern coast near Cape Nelson
(see Map II). As mentioned before, the boundary of the district
inhabited by this tribe corresponds to definite geographical
conditions, that is, to the absence of natural, inland fastnesses,
or of any obstacles to landing. Indeed, it is here that the Great
Barrier Reef becomes finally submerged, while again the Main Range
of mountains, which follows up to this point, always separated from
the foreshore by minor ranges, comes to an end.
Orangerie Bay is closed, on its Eastern side, by a headland, the
first of a series of hills, rising directly out of the sea. As we
approach the land, we can see distinctly the steep, folded slopes,
covered with dense, rank jungle, brightened here and there by bold
patches of lalang grass. The coast is broken first by a series of
small, land-locked bays or lagoons; then, after Fife Bay, come one or
two larger bays, with a flat, alluvial foreshore, and then from South
Cape the coast stretches in an almost unbroken line, for several miles,
to the end of the mainland.
The East End of New Guinea is a tropical region, where the distinction
between the dry and wet season is not felt very sharply. In fact,
there is no pronounced dry season there, and so the land is always
clad in intense, shining green, which forms a crude contrast with
the blue sea. The summits of the hills are often shrouded in trailing
mist, whilst white clouds brood or race over the sea, breaking up the
monotony of saturated, stiff blue and green. To someone not acquainted
with the South Sea landscape it is difficult to convey the permanent
impression of smiling festiveness, the alluring clearness of the beach,
fringed by jungle trees and palms, skirted by white foam and blue
sea, above it the slopes ascending in rich, stiff folds of dark and
light green, piebald and shaded over towards the summit by steamy,
tropical mists.
When I first sailed along this coast, it was after a few months'
residence and field work in the neighbouring district of the
Mailu. From Toulon Island, the main centre and most important
settlement of the Mailu, I used to look towards the East end of
Orangerie Bay, and on clear days I could see the pyramidal hills of
Bonabona, of Gadogado'a, as blue silhouettes in the distance. Under
the influence of my work, I came to regard this country within the
somewhat narrow native horizon, as the distant land to which perilous,
seasonal voyages are made, from whence come certain objects--baskets,
decorated carvings, weapons, ornaments--particularly well formed, and
superior to the local ones; the land to which the natives point with
awe and distrust, when speaking of specially evil and virulent forms
of sorcery; the home of a folk mentioned with horror as cannibals. Any
really fine touch of artistic taste, in Mailu carvings, would always
be directly imported or imitated from the East, and I also found that
the softest and most melodious songs and the finest dances came from
the Massim. Many of their customs and institutions would be quoted
to me as quaint and unusual, and thus, I, the ethnographer working
on the borderland of two cultures, naturally had my interest and
curiosity aroused. It seemed as if the Eastern people must be much
more complex, in one direction towards the cruel, man-eating savage,
in the other towards the finely-gifted, poetical lord of primitive
forest and seas, when I compared them with the relatively coarse and
dull native of Mailu. No wonder, therefore, that on approaching their
coast--travelling on that occasion in a small launch--I scanned the
landscape with keen interest, anxious to catch my first glimpse of
natives, or of their traces.
The first distinctly visible signs of human existence in this
neighbourhood are the patches of garden land. These big clearings,
triangular in shape, with the apex pointing uphill, look as if they
were plastered on to the steep slopes. From August to November, the
season when the natives cut and burn the bush, they can be seen,
at night, alight with slowly-blazing logs, and in daytime, their
smoke clings over the clearings, and slowly drifts along the hill
side. Later on in the year, when the plantation sprouts, they form
a bright spot, with the light green of their fresh leaves.
The villages in this district are to be found only on the foreshore,
at the foot of the hills, hidden in groves of trees, with here and
there a golden or purplish bit of thatch showing through the dark
green of the leaves. In calm weather a few canoes are probably not
far off, fishing. If the visitor is lucky enough to pass at the time
of feasts, trading expeditions, or any other big tribal gathering,
many a fine sea-going canoe may be seen approaching the village with
the sound of conch shells blowing melodiously.
In order to visit one of the typical, large settlements of these
natives, let us say near Fife Bay, on the South coast, or on the island
of Sariba, or Roge'a, it would be best to go ashore in some big,
sheltered bay, or on one of the extensive beaches at the foot of a
hilly island. We enter a clear, lofty grove, composed of palms, bread
fruit, mangoes, and other fruit trees, often with a sandy subsoil,
well weeded-out and clean, where grow clumps of ornamental bushes,
such as the red-flowering hybiscus, croton or aromatic shrub. Here we
find the village. Fascinating as may be the Motuan habitations standing
on high piles in the middle of a lagoon, or the neat streets of an
Aroma or Mailu settlement, or the irregular warren of small huts on
the Trobriand coast, all these cannot compete in picturesqueness or
charm with the villages of the Southern Massim. When, on a hot day,
we enter the deep shadow of fruit trees and palms, and find ourselves
in the midst of the wonderfully designed and ornamented houses hiding
here and there in irregular groups among the green, surrounded by
little decorative gardens of shells and flowers, with pebble-bordered
paths and stone-paved sitting circles, it seems as if the visions of
a primeval, happy, savage life were suddenly realised, even if only
in a fleeting impression. Big bodies of canoes are drawn high up the
beach and covered with palm leaves; here and there nets are drying,
spread out on special stands, and on the platforms in front of the
houses sit groups of men and women, busy at some domestic work,
smoking and chatting.
Walking along the paths which lead on for miles, we come every few
hundred yards on another hamlet of a few houses. Some of these are
evidently new and freshly decorated, while others are abandoned,
and a heap of broken household objects is lying on the ground,
showing that the death of one of the village elders has caused it to
be deserted. As the evening approaches, the life becomes more active,
fires are kindled, and the natives busy themselves cooking and eating
food. In the dancing season, towards dusk, groups of men and women
foregather, singing, dancing, and beating drums.
When we approach the natives closer and scan their personal appearance,
we are struck--if we compare them with their Western neighbours--by
the extreme lightness of their skin, their sturdy, even lumpy stature,
and a sort of soft, almost effete general impression which their
physique produces. Their fat, broad faces, their squashed noses, and
frequently oblique eyes, make them appear quaint and grotesque rather
than impressively savage. Their hair, not so woolly as that of the pure
Papuans, nor growing into the enormous halo of the Motuans, is worn in
big mops, which they often cut at the sides so as to give the head an
oblong, almost cylindrical shape. Their manner is shy and diffident,
but not unfriendly--rather smiling and almost servile, in very great
contrast to the morose Papuan, or the unfriendly, reserved South Coast
Mailu or Aroma. On the whole, they give at first approach not so much
the impression of wild savages as of smug and self-satisfied bourgeois.
Their ornaments are much less elaborate and more toned down than
those of their Western neighbours. Belts and armlets plaited of a dark
brown fern vine, small red shell disks and turtle shell rings as ear
ornaments are the only permanent, every-day decorations worn. Like all
Melanesians of Eastern New Guinea, they are quite cleanly in their
persons, and a personal approach to them does not offend any of our
senses. They are very fond of red hibiscus flowers stuck in their
hair, of scented flower wreaths on their head, of aromatic leaves
thrust into their belts and armlets. Their grand, festive head-dress
is extremely modest compared with the enormous erections of feathers
used by the Western tribes, and consists mainly of a round halo of
white cockatoo feathers stuck into their hair (see Plate V and VI).
In olden days, before the advent of white men, these pleasant,
apparently effete people were inveterate cannibals and head-hunters,
and in their large war-canoes they carried on treacherous, cruel
raids, falling upon sleeping villages, killing man, woman and child,
and feasting on their bodies. The attractive stone circles in their
villages were associated with their cannibal feasts. []
The traveller, who could settle down in one of their villages and
remain there sufficiently long to study their habits and enter into
their tribal life, would soon be struck by the absence of a well
recognised general authority. In this, however, the natives resemble
not only the other Western Melanesians of New Guinea, but also the
natives of the Melanesian Archipelago. The authority in the Southern
Massim tribe, as in many others, is vested in the village elders. In
each hamlet the eldest man has a position of personal influence and
power, and these collectively would in all cases represent the tribe
and carry out and enforce their decisions--always arrived at in strict
accord with tribal tradition.
Deeper sociological study would reveal the characteristic totemism
of these natives, and also the matrilineal construction of their
society. Descent, inheritance, and social position follow the
female line--a man always belongs to his mother's totemic division
and local group, and inherits from his mother's brother. Women also
enjoy a very independent position, and are exceedingly well treated,
and in tribal and festive affairs they play a prominent part (see
Plates V and VI). Some women, even, owing to their magical powers,
wield a considerable influence. []
The sexual life of these natives is extremely lax. Even when we
remember the very free standard of sex morals in the Melanesian
tribes of New Guinea, such as the Motu or the Mailu, we still find
these natives exceedingly loose in such matters. Certain reserves
and appearances which are usually kept up in other tribes, are here
completely abandoned. As is probably the case in many communities
where sex morals are lax, there is a complete absence of unnatural
practices and sex perversions. Marriage is concluded as the natural
end of a long and lasting liaison. []
These natives are efficient and industrious manufacturers, and great
traders. They own large sea-going canoes, which, however, they do
not manufacture themselves, but which they import from the Northern
Massim district, or from Panayati. Another feature of their culture,
which we shall meet again, consists of their big feasts, called So'i
(see Plates V and VI), associated with mortuary celebrations and
with a special mortuary taboo called gwara. In the big inter-tribal
trading of the Kula, these feasts play a considerable rôle.
This general, and necessarily somewhat superficial description,
is meant to give the reader a definite impression of these tribes,
provide them, so to speak, with a physiognomy, rather than to give
a full account of their tribal constitution. For this the reader is
referred to Professor C. G. Seligman's treatise, our main source of
knowledge on the Melanesians of New Guinea. The above sketch refers
to what Professor Seligman calls the Southern Massim, or more exactly
to the portion marked off in the Ethnographic sketch Map No. III as
"V, the Southern Massim"--the inhabitants of the Easternmost mainland
and the adjacent archipelago.
IV
Let us now move North, towards the district marked "IV, the
Dobu," in our map, which forms one of the most important links
in the chain of Kula and a very influential centre of cultural
influence. As we sail North, passing East Cape, the Easternmost
point of the main island--a long, flat promontory covered with
palms and fruit belts, and harbouring a very dense population--a
new world, new both geographically and ethnographically, opens up
before us. At first it is only a faint, bluish silhouette, like
a shadow of a distant mountain range, hovering far north over the
horizon. As we approach, the hills of Normanby, the nearest of three
big islands of the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago, become clearer and
take more definite shape and substance. A few high summits stand
out more distinctly through the usual tropical haze, among them the
characteristic double-peaked top of Bwebweso, the mountain where,
according to native legend, the spirits of the dead in these parts
lead their latter existence. The South Coast of Normanby, and the
interior are inhabited by a tribe or tribes of which we know nothing
ethnographically, except that they differ culturally from the rest
of their neighbours. These tribes also take no direct part in the Kula.
The Northern end of Normanby, both sides of the Dawson Straits
which separate the two islands of Normanby and Fergusson, and the
South-eastern tip of Fergusson, are inhabited by a very important
tribe, the Dobu. The heart of their district is the small extinct
volcano forming an island at the Eastern entrance to Dawson
Straits--Dobu, after which island they are named. To reach it, we
have to sail through this extremely picturesque channel. On either
side of the winding, narrow strait, green hills descend, and close it
in, till it is more like a mountain lake. Here and there they recede,
and a lagoon opens out. Or again they rise in fairly steep slopes, on
which there can be plainly seen triangular gardens, native houses on
piles, large tracts of unbroken jungle and patches of grass land. As
we proceed, the narrow straits broaden, and we see on our right a
wide flank of Mt. Sulomona'i on Normanby Island. On our left, there
is a shallow bay, and behind it a large, flat plain, stretching far
into the interior of Fergusson Island, and over it, we look into wide
valleys, and on to several distant mountain ranges. After another
turn, we enter a big bay, on both sides bordered by a flat foreshore,
and in the middle of it rises out of a girdle of tropical vegetation,
the creased cone of an extinct volcano, the island of Dobu.
We are now in the centre of a densely populated and ethnographically
important district. From this island, in olden days, fierce and daring
cannibal and head-hunting expeditions were periodically launched, to
the dread of the neighbouring tribes. The natives of the immediately
surrounding districts, of the flat foreshore on both sides of the
straits, and of the big neighbouring islands were allies. But the
more distant districts, often over a hundred miles away by sail,
never felt safe from the Dobuans. Again, this was, and still is,
one of the main links in the Kula, a centre of trade, industries and
general cultural influence. It is characteristic of the international
position of the Dobuans that their language is spoken as a lingua
franca all over the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago, in the Amphletts,
and as far north as the Trobriands. In the southern part of these
latter islands, almost everyone speaks Dobuan, although in Dobu
the language of the Trobriands or Kiriwinian is hardly spoken by
anyone. This is a remarkable fact, which cannot be easily explained
in terms of the present conditions, as the Trobrianders, if anything,
are on a higher level of cultural development than Dobuans, are more
numerous, and enjoy the same general prestige. []
Another remarkable fact about Dobu and its district is that it is
studded with spots of special, mythological interest. Its charming
scenery, of volcanic cones, of wide, calm bays, and lagoons overhung
by lofty, green mountains, with the reef-riddled, island-strewn ocean
on the North, has deep, legendary meaning for the native. Here is the
land and sea where the magically inspired sailors and heroes of the dim
past performed feats of daring and power. As we sail from the entrance
into Dawson Straits, through Dobu and the Amphletts to Boyowa, almost
every new configuration of the land which we pass is the scene of some
legendary exploit. Here the narrow gorge has been broken through by a
magic canoe flying in the air. There the two rocks standing in the sea
are the petrified bodies of two mythological heroes who were stranded
at this spot after a quarrel. Here again, a land-locked lagoon has
been a port of refuge to a mythical crew. Apart from its legends,
the scenery before us, fine as it is, derives still more charm from
the knowledge that it is, and has been a distant Eldorado, a land
of promise and hope to generation after generation of really daring
native sailors from the Northern islands. And in the past these lands
and seas must have been the scene of migrations and fights, of tribal
invasions, and of gradual infiltrations of peoples and cultures.
In personal appearance, the Dobuans have a very distinct physique,
which differentiates them sharply from the Southern Massim and from the
Trobrianders; very dark-skinned, small of stature, with big heads and
rounded shoulders, they give a strange, almost gnome-like impression
on a first encounter. In their manner, and their tribal character,
there is something definitely pleasant, honest and open--an impression
which long acquaintance with them confirms and strengthens. They are
the general favourites of the whites, form the best and most reliable
servants, and traders who have resided long among them compare them
favourably with other natives.
Their villages, like those of the previously described Massim, are
scattered over wide areas. The fertile and flat foreshores which
they inhabit are studded with small, compact hamlets of a dozen or
so houses, hidden in the midst of one continuous plantation of fruit
trees, palms, bananas and yams. The houses are built on piles, but
are cruder architecturally than those of the S. Massim, and almost
without any decorations, though in the olden days of head-hunting
some of them were ornamented with skulls.
In their social constitution, the people are totemic, being divided
into a number of exogamous clans with linked totems. There is no
institution of regular chieftainship, nor have they any system of
rank or caste such as we shall meet in the Trobriands. Authority is
vested in the elders of the tribe. In each hamlet there is a man who
wields the greatest influence locally, and acts as its representative
on such tribal councils as may arise in connection with ceremonies
and expeditions.
Their system of kinship is matrilineal, and women hold a very good
position, and wield great influence. They also seem to take a much
more permanent and prominent part in tribal life than is the case among
the neighbouring populations. There is notably one of the features of
Dobuan society, which seems to strike the Trobrianders as peculiar,
and to which they will direct attention while giving information,
even although in the Trobriands also women have a good enough social
position. In Dobu, women take an important part in gardening, and
have a share in performing garden magic, and this in itself gives
them a high status. Again, the main instrument for wielding power
and inflicting penalties in these lands, sorcery, is to a great
extent in the hands of women. The flying witches, so characteristic
of the Eastern New Guinea type of culture, here have one of their
strongholds. We shall have to go into this subject more in detail
when speaking about shipwreck and the dangers of sailing. Besides
this, women practice ordinary sorcery, which in other tribes is only
man's prerogative.
As a rule, amongst natives, a high position of women is associated with
sex laxity. In this, Dobu is an exception. Not only are married women
expected to remain faithful, and adultery considered a great crime,
but, in sharp contrast to all surrounding tribes, the unmarried girls
of Dobu remain strictly chaste. There are no ceremonial or customary
forms of licence, and an intrigue would be certainly regarded as
an offence.
A few more words must be said here about sorcery, as this is a matter
of great importance in all inter-tribal relations. The dread of sorcery
is enormous, and when the natives visit distant parts, this dread is
enhanced by the additional awe of the unknown and foreign. Besides
the flying witches, there are, in Dobu, men and women who, by their
knowledge of magical spells and rites, can inflict disease and cause
death. The methods of these sorcerers, and all the beliefs clustering
round this subject are very much the same as those in the Trobriands
which we shall meet later on. These methods are characterised by
being very rational and direct, and implying hardly any supernatural
element. The sorcerer has to utter a spell over some substance, and
this must be administered by mouth, or else burnt over the fire in
the victim's hut. The pointing stick is also used by the sorcerers
in certain rites.
If his methods are compared with those used by flying witches, who
eat the heart and lungs, drink the blood, snap the bones of their
enemies, and moreover possess the powers of invisibility and of flying,
the Dobuan sorcerer seems to have but simple and clumsy means at his
disposal. He is also very much behind his Mailu or Motu namesakes--I
say namesakes, because sorcerers throughout the Massim are called
Bara'u, and the same word is used in Mailu, while the Motu use the
reduplicated Babara'u. The magicians in these parts use such powerful
methods as those of killing the victim first, opening up the body,
removing, lacerating or charming the inside, then bringing the victim
to life again, only that he may soon sicken and eventually die. []
According to Dobuan belief, the spirits of the dead go to the top
of Mt. Bwebweso on Normanby Island. This confined space harbours
the shades of practically all the natives of the d'Entrecasteaux
Archipelago, except those of Northern Goodenough Island, who, as I was
told by some local informants, go after death to the spirit land of
the Trobrianders. [] The Dobuans have also the belief in a double
soul--one, shadowy and impersonal, surviving the bodily death for a
few days only, and remaining in the vicinity of the grave, the other
the real spirit, who goes to Bwebweso.
It is interesting to note how natives, living on the boundary
between two cultures and between two types of belief, regard the
ensuing differences. A native of, say, Southern Boyowa, confronted
with the question:--how it is that the Dobuans place spirit-land on
Bwebweso, whereas they, the Trobrianders, place it in Tuma?--does not
see any difficulty in solving the problem. He does not regard the
difference as due to a dogmatic conflict in doctrine. Quite simply
he answers:--"Their dead go to Bwebweso and ours to Tuma." The
metaphysical laws of existence are not yet considered subject to
one invariable truth. As human destinies in life change, according
to varieties in tribal custom, so also the doings of the spirit! An
interesting theory is evolved to harmonise the two beliefs in a mixed
case. There is a belief that if a Trobriander were to die in Dobu,
when on a Kula expedition, he would go for a time to Bwebweso. In
due season, the spirits of the Trobrianders would sail from Tuma,
the spirit land, to Bwebweso, on a spirit Kula, and the newly departed
one would join their party and sail with them back to Tuma.
On leaving Dobu, we sail the open sea, a sea studded with coral patches
and sand-banks, and seamed with long barrier reefs, where treacherous
tides, running sometimes as much as five knots, make sailing really
dangerous, especially for helpless native craft. This is the Kula sea,
the scene of the inter-tribal expeditions and adventures which will
be the theme of our future descriptions.
The Eastern shore of Ferguson Island, near Dobu, along which we are
sailing, consists first of a series of volcanic cones and capes,
giving the landscape the aspect of something unfinished and crudely
put together. At the foot of the hills there stretches for several
miles beyond Dobu a broad alluvial flat covered with villages--Deide'i,
Tu'utauna, Bwayowa, all important centres of trade, and the homes of
the direct Kula partners of the Trobrianders. Heavy fumes can be seen
floating above the jungle, coming from the hot geysers of Deide'i,
which spurt up in high jets every few minutes.
Soon we come abreast of two characteristically shaped, dark rocks,
one half hidden in the vegetation of the shore, the other standing
in the sea at the end of a narrow sand-spit dividing the two. These
are Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a, two men turned into stone, as mythical
tradition has it. Here the big sailing expeditions, those starting
northwards from Dobu, as well as those arriving from the North,
still make a halt--just as they have done for centuries, and, under
observation of many taboos, give sacrificial offerings to the stones,
with ritual invocations for propitious trade.
In the lee of these two rocks, runs a small bay with a clean, sandy
beach, called Sarubwoyna. Here a visitor, lucky enough to pass at
the right moment of the right season would see a picturesque and
interesting scene. There before him would lie a huge fleet of some
fifty to a hundred canoes, anchored in the shallow water, with swarms
of natives upon them, all engaged in some strange and mysterious
task. Some of these, bent over heaps of herbs, would be mumbling
incantations; others would be painting and adorning their bodies. An
onlooker of two generations ago coming upon the same scene would no
doubt have been led to suspect that he was watching the preparations
for some dramatic tribal contest, for one of those big onslaughts in
which the existence of whole villages and tribes were wiped out. It
would even have been difficult for him to discern from the behaviour
of the natives whether they were moved more by fear or by the spirit of
aggression, as both these passions might have been read--and correctly
so--into their attitudes and movements. That the scene contained no
element of warfare; that this fleet had come here from about a hundred
miles sailing distance on a well regulated tribal visit; that it had
drawn up here for the final and most important preparations--this would
not have been an easy guess to make. Nowadays--for this is carried out
to this day with undiminished pomp--it would be an equally picturesque,
but of course, tamer affair, since the romance of danger has gone
from native life. As we learn in the course of this study to know
more about these natives, their general ways and customs, and more
especially about their Kula cycle of beliefs, ideas and sentiments,
we shall be able to look with understanding eyes upon this scene,
and comprehend this mixture of awe with intense, almost aggressive
eagerness and this behaviour, which appears cowed and fierce at the
same time.
V
Immediately after leaving Sarubwoyna and rounding the promontory
of the two rocks, we come in sight of the island of Sanaroa, a big,
sprawling, coral flat, with a range of volcanic hills on its western
side. On the wide lagoon to the East of this island are the fishing
grounds, where year after year the Trobrianders, returning from Dobu,
look for the valuable spondylus shell, which, after their arrival home,
is worked into the red discs, which form one of the main objects of
native wealth. In the North of Sanaroa there is a stone in one of
the tidal creeks called Sinatemubadiye'i, once a woman, the sister
of Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a, who, with her brothers came in here and
was petrified before the last stage of the journey. She also receives
offerings from canoes, coming either way on Kula expeditions.
Sailing further, some fine scenery unfolds itself on our left, where
the high mountain range comes nearer to the sea shore, and where
small bays, deep valleys and wooded slopes succeed one another. By
carefully scanning the slopes, we can see small batches of some three
to six miserable huts. These are the dwellings of the inhabitants,
who are of a distinctly lower culture than the Dobuans, take no part
in the Kula, and in olden days were the cowed and unhappy victims of
their neighbours.
On our right there emerge behind Sanaroa the islands of Uwama and
Tewara, the latter inhabited by Dobuan natives. Tewara is of interest
to us, because one of the myths which we shall get to know later on
makes it the cradle of the Kula. As we sail on, rounding one after
the other the Eastern promontories of Fergusson Island, a group
of strongly marked monumental profiles appears far on the horizon
from behind the receding headlands. These are the Amphlett Islands,
the link, both geographically and culturally, between the coastal
tribes of the volcanic region of Dobu and the inhabitants of the
flat coral archipelago of the Trobriands. This portion of the sea
is very picturesque, and has a charm of its own even in this land of
fine and varied scenery. On the main island of Fergusson, overlooking
the Amphletts from the South, and ascending straight out of the sea
in a slim and graceful pyramid, lies the tall mountain of Koyatabu,
the highest peak on the island. Its big, green surface is cut in half
by the white ribbon of a watercourse, starting almost half-way up and
running down to the sea. Scattered under the lea of Koyatabu are the
numerous smaller and bigger islands of the Amphlett Archipelago--steep,
rocky hills, shaped into pyramids, sphinxes and cupolas, the whole
a strange and picturesque assemblage of characteristic forms.
With a strong South-Easterly wind, which blows here for three quarters
of the year, we approach the islands very fast, and the two most
important ones, Gumawana and Ome'a, almost seem to leap out of the
mist. As we anchor in front of Gumawana village at the S.E. end of
the island, we cannot but feel impressed. Built on a narrow strip
of foreshore, open to the breakers, and squeezed down to the water's
edge by an almost precipitously rising jungle at its back, the village
has been made sea-proof by walls of stone surrounding the houses with
several bulwarks, and by stone dykes forming small artificial harbours
along the sea front. The shabby and unornamented huts, built on piles,
look very picturesque in these surroundings (see Plates VII and XLIII).
The inhabitants of this village, and of the four remaining ones in
the archipelago, are a queer people. They are a numerically weak
tribe, easily assailable from the sea, getting hardly enough to
eat from their rocky islands; and yet, through their unique skill
in pottery, their great daring and efficiency as sailors, and their
central position half way between Dobu and the Trobriands, they have
succeeded in becoming in several respects the monopolists of this part
of the world. They have also the main characteristics of monopolists:
grasping and mean, inhospitable and greedy, keen on keeping the trade
and exchange in their own hands, yet unprepared to make any sacrifice
towards improving it; shy, yet arrogant to anyone who has any dealings
with them; they contrast unfavourably with their southern and northern
neighbours. And this is not only the white man's impression. []
The Trobrianders, as well as the Dobuans, give the Amphlett natives
a very bad name, as being stingy and unfair in all Kula transactions,
and as having no real sense of generosity and hospitality.
When our boat anchors there, the natives approach it in their canoes,
offering clay pots for sale. But if we want to go ashore and have a
look at their village, there is a great commotion, and all the women
disappear from the open places. The younger ones run and hide in the
jungle behind the village, and even the old hags conceal themselves
in the houses. So that if we want to see the making of pottery,
which is almost exclusively women's work, we must first lure some
old woman out of her retreat with generous promises of tobacco and
assurances of honourable intentions.
This has been mentioned here, because it is of ethnographic interest,
as it is not only white men who inspire this shyness; if native
strangers, coming from a distance for trade, put in for a short time
in the Amphletts, the women also disappear in this fashion. This very
ostentatious coyness is, however, not a sham, because in the Amphletts,
even more than in Dobu, married and unmarried life is characterised
by strict chastity and fidelity. Women here have also a good deal of
influence, and take a great part in gardening and the performance of
garden magic. In social institutions and customs, the natives present
a mixture of Northern and Southern Massim elements. There are no
chiefs, but influential elders wield authority, and in each village
there is a head man who takes the lead in ceremonies and other big
tribal affairs. Their totemic clans are identical with those of Murua
(District II). Their somewhat precarious food supply comes partly
from the poor gardens, partly from fishing with kite and fish trap,
which, however, can only seldom be carried out, and does not yield very
much. They are not self-supporting, and receive, in form of presents
and by trade, a good deal of vegetable food as well as pigs from the
mainland, from Dobu and the Trobriands. In personal appearance they
are very much like the Trobrianders, that is, taller than the Dobuans,
lighter skinned, and with finer features.
We must now leave the Amphletts and proceed to the Trobriand Islands,
the scene of most of the occurrences described in this book, and
the country concerning which I possess by far the largest amount of
ethnographic information.