such as we imagined in that chapter, would reveal to an open-eyed
Ethnographer this economic truth. He would see visiting parties--women
carrying big food baskets on their head, men with loads on their
shoulders--and on inquiring he would learn that these were gifts to
be presented under one of the many names they bear, in fulfilment
of some social obligation. Offerings of first fruits are given to
the chief or to relatives-in-law, when the mango or bread fruit or
sugar cane are ripe. Big quantities of sugar cane being borne to a
chief, carried by some twenty to thirty men running along the road,
produce the impressions of a tropical Birnam Wood moving through the
jungle. At harvest time all the roads are full of big parties of men
carrying food, or returning with empty baskets. From the far North of
Kiriwina a party will have to run for some twelve miles to the creek of
Tukwa'ukwa, get into canoes, punt for miles along the shallow Lagoon,
and have another good walk inland from Sinaketa; and all this is in
order to fill the yam house of a man who could do it quite well for
himself, if it were not that he is under obligation to give all the
harvest to his sister's husband! Displays of gifts associated with
marriage, with sagali (food distributions), with payments for magic,
all these are some of the most picturesque characteristics of the
Trobriand garden, road and village, and must impress themselves upon
even a superficial observer.

The second fallacy, that man keeps all he needs and never spontaneously
gives it away, must therefore be completely discarded. Not that the
natives do not possess a strongly retentive tendency. To imagine that
they differ from other human beings in this, would be to fall out
of one fallacy into the opposite one also already mentioned, namely
that there is a sort of primitive communism among the natives. On the
contrary, just because they think so much of giving, the distinction
between mine and thine is not obliterated but enhanced; for the
presents are by no means given haphazardly, but practically always in
fulfilment of definite obligations, and with a great deal of formal
punctilio. The very fundamental motive of giving, the vanity of a
display of possession and power, a limine rules out any assumption
of communistic tendencies or institutions. Not in all cases, but
in many of them, the handing over of wealth is the expression
of the superiority of the giver over the recipient. In others,
it represents subordination to a chief, or a kinship relation or
relationship-in-law. And it is important to realise that in almost
all forms of exchange in the Trobriands, there is not even a trace
of gain, nor is there any reason for looking at it from the purely
utilitarian and economic standpoint, since there is no enhancement
of mutual utility through the exchange.

Thus, it is quite a usual thing in the Trobriands for a type of
transaction to take place in which A gives twenty baskets of yams to
B, receiving for it a small polished blade, only to have the whole
transaction reversed in a few weeks' time. Again, at a certain stage of
mortuary ritual, a present of valuables is given, and on the same day
later on, the identical articles are returned to the giver. Cases like
that described in the kabigidoya custom (Div. III of this chapter),
where each owner of a new canoe made a round of all the others,
each thus giving away again what he receives, are typical. In the
wasi--exchange of fish for yams, to be described presently--through
a practically useless gift, a burdensome obligation is imposed, and
one might speak of an increase of burdens rather than an increase
of utilities.

The view that the native can live in a state of individual search
for food, or catering for his own household only, in isolation from
any interchange of goods, implies a calculating, cold egotism, the
possibility of enjoyment by man of utilities for their sake. This view,
and all the previously criticised assumptions, ignore the fundamental
human impulse to display, to share, to bestow. They ignore the deep
tendency to create social ties through exchange of gifts. Apart from
any consideration as to whether the gifts are necessary or even useful,
giving for the sake of giving is one of the most important features of
Trobriand sociology, and, from its very general and fundamental nature,
I submit that it is a universal feature of all primitive societies.

I have dwelt at length on economic facts which on the surface are not
directly connected with the Kula. But if we realise that in these
facts we may be able to read the native's attitude towards wealth
and value, their importance for the main theme becomes obvious. The
Kula is the highest and the most dramatic expression of the native's
conception of value, and if we want to understand all the customs and
actions of the Kula in their real bearings we must, first and foremost,
grasp the psychology that lies at its basis.




VI

I have on purpose spoken of forms of exchange, of gifts and
counter-gifts, rather than of barter or trade, because, although there
exist forms of barter pure and simple, there are so many transitions
and gradations between that and simple gift, that it is impossible
to draw any fixed line between trade on the one hand, and exchange
of gifts on the other. Indeed, the drawing of any lines to suit
our own terminology and our own distinctions is contrary to sound
method. In order to deal with these facts correctly it is necessary
to give a complete survey of all forms of payment or present. In this
survey there will be at one end the extreme case of pure gift, that
is an offering for which nothing is given in return. Then, through
many customary forms of gift or payment, partially or conditionally
returned, which shade into each other, there come forms of exchange,
where more or less strict equivalence is observed, arriving finally
at real barter. In the following survey I shall roughly classify each
transaction according to the principle of its equivalence.

Such tabularised accounts cannot give the same clear vision of
facts as a concrete description might do, and they even produce
the impression of artificiality, but, and this must be emphatically
stated, I shall not introduce here artificial categories, foreign to
the native mind. Nothing is so misleading in ethnographic accounts
as the description of facts of native civilisations in terms of
our own. This, however, shall not be done here. The principles of
arrangement, although quite beyond the comprehension of the natives,
are nevertheless contained in their social organisation, customs,
and even in their linguistic terminology. This latter always affords
the simplest and surest means of approach towards the understanding of
native distinctions and classifications. But it also must be remembered
that, though important as a clue to native ideas, the knowledge of
terminology is not a miraculous short-cut into the native's mind. As
a matter of fact, there exist many salient and extremely important
features of Trobriand sociology and social psychology, which are not
covered by any term, whereas their language distinguishes sub-divisions
and subtleties which are quite irrelevant with regard to actual
conditions. Thus, a survey of terminology must always be supplemented
by a direct analysis of ethnographic fact and inquiry into the native's
ideas, that is, by collecting a body of opinions, typical expressions,
and customary phrases by direct cross-questioning. The most conclusive
and deepest insight, however, must always be obtained by a study of
behaviour, by analysis of ethnographic custom and concrete cases of
traditional rules.



LIST OF GIFTS, PAYMENTS, AND COMMERCIAL TRANSACTIONS.

1. Pure Gifts.--By this, as just mentioned, we understand an act,
in which an individual gives an object or renders a service without
expecting or getting any return. This is not a type of transaction
very frequently met in Trobriand tribal life. It must be remembered
that accidental or spontaneous gifts, such as alms or charities, do
not exist, since everybody in need would be maintained by his or her
family. Again, there are so many well-defined economic obligations,
connected with kinship and relationship-in-law, that anyone wanting
a thing or a service would know where to go and ask for it. And then,
of course, it would not be a free gift, but one imposed by some social
obligation. Moreover, since gifts in the Trobriands are conceived
as definite acts with a social meaning, rather than transmissions of
objects, it results that where social duties do not directly impose
them, gifts are very rare.

The most important type of free gift are the presents characteristic
of relations between husband and wife, and parents and children. Among
the Trobrianders, husband and wife own their things separately. There
are man's and woman's possessions, and each of the two partners
has a special part of the household goods under control. When one
of them dies, his or her relations inherit the things. But though
the possessions are not joint, they very often give presents to one
another, more especially a husband to his wife.

As to the parents' gifts to the children, it is clear that in a
matrilineal society, where the mother is the nearest of kin to
her children in a sense quite different to that in our society,
they share in and inherit from her all her possessions. It is more
remarkable that the father, who, according to native belief and law,
is only the mother's husband, and not the kinsman of the children, is
the only relation from whom free gifts are expected. [57] The father
will give freely of his valuables to a son, and he will transmit to
him his relationships in the Kula, according to the definite rules by
which it is done (see Chapter XI, Division II). Also, one of the most
valuable and valued possessions, the knowledge of magic, is handed
over willingly, and free of any counter-gift, from father to son. The
ownership of trees in the village grove and ownership in garden plots
is ceded by the father to his son during the lifetime of the former. At
his death, it often has to be returned to the man's rightful heirs,
that is, his sister's children. All the objects of use embraced by
the term gugua will be shared with him as a matter of course by a
man's children. Also, any special luxuries in food, or such things as
betel-nut or tobacco, he will share with his children as well as with
his wife. In all such small articles of indulgence, free distribution
will also obtain between the chief or the headman and his vassals,
though not in such a generous spirit, as within the family. In fact,
everyone who possesses betel-nut or tobacco in excess of what he can
actually consume on the spot, would be expected to give it away. This
very special rule, which also happens to apply to such articles as
are generally used by white men for trade, has largely contributed to
the tenacity of the idea of the communistic native. In fact, many a
man will carefully conceal any surplus so as to avoid the obligation
of sharing it and yet escape the opprobrium attaching to meanness.

There is no comprehensive name for this class of free gifts in native
terminology. The verb "to give" (sayki) would simply be used, and on
inquiry as to whether there was repayment for such a gift, the natives
would directly answer that this was a gift without repayment; mapula
being the general term for return gifts, and retributions, economic
as well as otherwise. The natives undoubtedly would not think of
free gifts as forming one class, as being all of the same nature. The
acts of liberality on the part of the chief, the sharing of tobacco
and betel-nut by anybody who has some to spare, would be taken as a
matter of course. Gifts by a husband to a wife are considered also as
rooted in the nature of this relationship. They have as a matter of
fact a very coarse and direct way of formulating that such gifts are
the mapula (payment) for matrimonial relations, a conception in harmony
with the ideas underlying another type of gift, of which I shall speak
presently, that given in return for sexual intercourse. Economically
the two are entirely different, since those of husband to wife are
casual gifts within a permanent relationship, whereas the others are
definite payment for favours given on special occasions.

The most remarkable fact, however, is that the same explanation
is given for the free gifts given by the father to his children;
that is to say, a gift given by a father to his son is said to be a
repayment for the man's relationship to the son's mother. According to
the matrilineal set of ideas about kinship, mother and son are one,
but the father is a stranger (tomakava) to his son, an expression
often used when these matters are discussed. There is no doubt,
however, that the state of affairs is much more complex, for there is
a very strong direct emotional attitude between father and child. The
father wants always to give things to his child, as I have said,
(compare Chapter II, Division VI), and this is very well realised by
the natives themselves.

As a matter of fact, the psychology underlying these conditions is
this: normally a man is emotionally attached to his wife, and has a
very strong personal affection towards his children, and expresses
these feelings by gifts, and more especially by trying to endow his
children with as much of his wealth and position as he can. This,
however, runs counter to the matrilineal principle as well as to the
general rule that all gifts require repayment, and so these gifts
are explained away by the natives in a manner that agrees with these
rules. The above crude explanation of the natives by reference to sex
payment is a document, which in a very illuminating manner shows up
the conflict between the matrilineal theory and the actual sentiments
of the natives, and also how necessary it is to check the explicit
statements of natives, and the views contained in their terms and
phraseology by direct observation of full-blooded life, in which we
see man not only laying down rules and theories, but behaving under
the impulse of instinct and emotion.

2. Customary payments, re-paid irregularly, and without strict
equivalence.--The most important of these are the annual payments
received at harvest time by a man from his wife's brothers
(cf. Chapter II, Divisions IV and V). These regular and unfailing
gifts are so substantial, that they form the bulk of a man's income
in food. Sociologically, they are perhaps the strongest strand
in the fabric of the Trobriands tribal constitution. They entail a
life-long obligation of every man to work for his kinswomen and their
families. When a boy begins to garden, he does it for his mother. When
his sisters grow up and marry, he works for them. If he has neither
mother nor sisters, his nearest female blood relation will claim the
proceeds of his labour. [58]

The reciprocity in these gifts never amounts to their full value,
but the recipient is supposed to give a valuable (vaygu'a) or a pig
to his wife's brother from time to time. Again if he summons his
wife's kinsmen to do communal work for him, according to the kabutu
system, he pays them in food. In this case also the payments are not
the full equivalent of the services rendered. Thus we see that the
relationship between a man and his wife's kinsmen is full of mutual
gifts and services, in which repayment, however, by the husband, is
not equivalent and regular, but spasmodic and smaller in value than
his own share; and even if for some reason or other it ever fails,
this does not relieve the others from their obligations. In the
case of a chief, the duties of his numerous relatives-in-law have
to be much more stringently observed; that is, they have to give him
much bigger harvest gifts, and they also have to keep pigs, and grow
betel and coco-nut palms for him. For all this, they are rewarded by
correspondingly large presents of valuables, which again, however,
do not fully repay them for their contributions.

The tributes given by vassal village communities to a chief
and usually repaid by small counter-gifts, also belong to this
class. Besides these, there are the contributions given by one kinsman
to another, when this latter has to carry out a mortuary distribution
(sagali). Such contributions are sometimes, but irregularly and
spasmodically, repaid by objects of small value.

The natives do not embrace this class under one term, but the
word urigubu, which designates harvest gifts from the wife's
brothers, stands for one of the most important conceptions of native
sociology and economics. They have quite a clear idea about the many
characteristics of the urigubu duties, which have been described here,
and about their far-reaching importance. The occasional counter gifts
given by the husband to his wife's kinsmen are called youlo. The
chief's tributes which we have put in this category are called
pokala. The placing of these two types of payment in one category is
justified both by the similar mechanism, and by the close resemblance
between the urigubu gifts, when given to a chief, and the pokala
received by him. There are even resemblances in the actual ceremonial,
which however, would require too much of a detailed description
to be more than mentioned here. The word pokala is a general term
for the chief's tributes, and there are several other expressions
which cover gifts of first fruit, gifts at the main harvest,
and some other sub-divisions. There are also terms describing the
various counter-gifts given by a chief to those who pay him tribute,
according to whether they consist of pig's flesh or yams or fruit. I
am not mentioning all these native words, in order not to overload
the account with details, which would be irrelevant here.

3. Payment for services rendered. This class differs from the foregoing
one in that here the payment is within limits defined by custom. It has
to be given each time the service is performed, but we cannot speak
here of direct economic equivalence, since one of the terms of the
equation consists of a service, the value of which cannot be assessed,
except by conventional estimates. All services done by specialists
for individuals or for the community, belong here. The most important
of these are undoubtedly the services of the magician. The garden
magician, for instance, receives definite gifts from the community and
from certain individuals. The sorcerer is paid by the man who asks him
to kill or who desires to be healed. The presents given for magic of
rain and fair weather are very considerable. I have already described
the payments given to a canoe-builder. I shall have to speak later
on of those received by the specialists who make the various types
of vaygu'a.

Here also belong the payments, always associated with love
intrigues. Disinterested love is quite unknown among these people
of great sexual laxity. Every time a girl favours her lover, some
small gift has to be given immediately. This is the case in the normal
intrigues, going on every night in the village between unmarried girls
and boys, and also in more ceremonial cases of indulgence, like the
katuyausi custom, or the mortuary consolations, mentioned in Chapter
II, Division II. A few areca-nuts, some betel pepper, a bit of tobacco,
some turtle-shell rings, or spondylus discs, such are the small tokens
of gratitude and appreciation never omitted by the youth. An attractive
girl need never go unprovided with the small luxuries of life.

The big mortuary distributions of food, sagali, have already been
mentioned several times. On their economic side, these distributions
are payments for funerary services. The deceased man's nearest maternal
kinsman has to give food gifts to all the villagers for their assuming
mourning, that is to say, for blackening their faces and cutting their
hair. He pays some other special people for wailing and grave digging;
a still smaller group for cutting out the dead man's ulna and using
it as a lime spoon; and the widow or widower for the prolonged and
scrupulously to be observed period of strict mourning.

All these details show how universal and strict is the idea that
every social obligation or duty, though it may not on any account
be evaded, has yet to be re-paid by a ceremonial gift. The function
of these ceremonial re-payments is, on the surface of it, to thicken
the social ties from which arise the obligations.

The similarity of the gifts and payments which we have put into
this category is expressed by the native use of the word mapula
(repayment, equivalent) in connection with all these gifts. Thus
in giving the reason why a certain present is made to a magician,
or why a share is allotted to a man at the sagali (distribution),
or why some valuable object is given to a specialist, they would
say: "This is the mapula for what he has done." Another interesting
identification contained in linguistic usage is the calling of both
magical payments and payments to specialists: a 'restorative,' or,
literally, a  'poultice.' Certain extra fees given to a magician are
described as 'katuwarina kaykela' or 'poultice for his leg'; as the
magician, especially he of the garden or the sorcerer, has to take
long walks in connection with his magic. The expression 'poultice of
my back,' will be used by a canoe-builder who has been bending over
his work, or 'poultice of my hand' by a carver or stone-polisher. But
the identity of these gifts is not in any way expressed in the detailed
terminology. In fact, there is a list of words describing the various
payments for magic, the gifts given to specialists, love payments,
and the numerous types of gifts distinguished at the sagali. Thus a
magical payment, of which a small part would be offered to ancestral
spirits, is called ula'ula; a substantial magical gift is called
sousula; a gift to a sorcerer is described by the verb ibudipeta,
and there are many more special names. The gifts to the specialists
are called vewoulo--the initial gift; yomelu--a gift of food given
after the object has been ceremonially handed over to the owner;
karibudaboda--a substantial gift of yams given at the next harvest. The
gifts of food, made while the work is in progress are called vakapula;
but this latter term has much wider application, as it covers all the
presents of cooked or raw food given to workers by the man, for whom
they work. The sexual gifts are called buwana or sebuwana. I shall
not enumerate the various terminological distinctions of sagali gifts,
as this would be impossible to do, without entering upon the enormous
subject of mortuary duties and distributions.

The classification of love gifts and sagali gifts in the same category
with gifts to magicians and specialists, is a generalisation in which
the natives would not be able to follow us. For them, the gifts given
at sagali form a class in themselves and so do the love gifts. We may
say that, from the economic point of view, we were correct in classing
all these gifts together, because they all represent a definite type of
equivalence; also they correspond to the native idea that every service
has to be paid for, an idea documented by the linguistic use of the
word mapula. But within this class, the sub-divisions corresponding
to native terminology represent important distinctions made by the
natives between the three sub-classes; love gifts, sagali gifts,
and gifts for magical and professional services.

4. Gifts returned in economically equivalent form.--We are enumerating
the various types of exchange, as they gradually assume the appearance
of trade. In this fourth class have been put such gifts as must be
re-paid with almost strict equivalence. But it must be stressed
that strict equivalence of two gifts does not assimilate them to
trade altogether. There can be no more perfect equivalence between
gift and counter-gift, than when A gives to B an object, and B on
the same day returns the very same object to A. At a certain stage
of the mortuary proceedings, such a gift is given and received back
again by a deceased man's kinsmen and his widow's brothers. Yet it
is obvious at once that no transaction could be further removed from
trade. The above described gifts at the presentation of new canoes
(kabigidoya) belong to this class. So do also numerous presents given
to one community by another, on visits which are going to be returned
soon. Payments for the lease of a garden plot are at least in certain
districts of the Trobriands returned by a gift of equivalent value.

Sociologically, this class of gifts is characteristic of the
relationship between friends (luba'i). Thus the kabigidoya takes
place between friends, the Kula takes place between overseas partners
and inland friends, but of course relations-in-law also belong par
excellence to this category.

Other types of equivalent gifts which have to be mentioned here
shortly, are the presents given by one household to another, at
the milamala, the festive period associated with the return of the
ancestral spirits to their villages. Offerings of cooked food are
ceremonially exposed in houses for the use of the spirits, and after
these have consumed the spiritual substance, the material one is
given to a neighbouring household. These gifts are always reciprocal.

Again, a series of mutual gifts exchanged immediately after marriage
between a man and his wife's father (not matrilineal kinsman in this
case), have to be put into this category.

The economic similarity of these gifts is not expressed in terminology
or even in linguistic use. All the gifts I have enumerated have
their own special names, which I shall not adduce here, so as not
to multiply irrelevant details of information. The natives have no
comprehensive idea that such a class as I have spoken of exists. My
generalisation is based upon the very interesting fact, that all
through the tribal life we find scattered cases of direct exchange
of equivalent gifts. Nothing perhaps could show up so clearly, how
much the natives value the give and take of presents for its own sake.

5. Exchange of Material Goods against Privileges, Titles and
non-material Possessions. Under this heading, I class transactions
which approach trade, in so far as two owners, each possessing
something they value highly, exchange it for something they value
still more. The equivalence here is not so strict, at any rate
not so measurable, as in the previous class, because in this one,
one of the terms is usually a non-material possession, such as the
knowledge of magic, the privilege to execute a dance, or the title
to a garden plot, which latter very often is a mere title only. But
in spite of this smaller measure of equivalence, their character of
trade is more marked, just because of the element of mutual desire
to carry out the transaction and of the mutual advantage.

Two important types of transaction belong to this class. One of them
is the acquisition by a man of the goods or privileges which are due
to him by inheritance from his maternal uncle or elder brother, but
which he wishes to acquire before the elder's death. If a maternal
uncle is to give up in his life time a garden, or to teach and hand
over a system of magic, he has to be paid for that. As a rule several
payments, and very substantial ones, have to be given to him, and
he gradually relinquishes his rights, giving the garden land, bit
by bit, teaching the magic in instalments. After the final payment,
the title of ownership is definitely handed over to the younger man.

I have drawn attention already in the general description of the
Trobriand Sociology (Chapter II, Division VI) to the remarkable
contrast between matrilineal inheritance and that between father
and son. It is noteworthy that what is considered by the natives
rightful inheritance has yet to be paid for, and that a man who
knows that in any case he would obtain a privilege sooner or later,
if he wants it at once, must pay for it, and that heavily. None the
less, this transaction takes place only when it appears desirable to
both parties. There is no customary obligation on either of the two
to enter on the exchange, and it has to be considered advantageous
to both before it can be completed. The acquisition of magic is of
course different, because that must naturally always be taught by
the elder man to the younger in his life time.

The other type of transaction belonging to this class, is the payment
for dances. Dances are "owned"; that is, the original inventor
has the right of "producing" his dance and song in his village
community. If another village takes a fancy to this song and dance,
it has to purchase the right to perform it. This is done by handing
ceremonially to the original village a substantial payment of food
and valuables, after which the dance is taught to the new possessors.

In some rare cases, the title to garden-lands would pass from one
community to another. For this again, the members and headman of the
acquiring community would have to pay substantially to those who hand
over their rights.

Another transaction which has to be mentioned here is the hire of
a canoe, where a temporary transference of ownership takes place in
return for a payment.

The generalisation by which this class has been formed, although it
does not run counter to native terminology and ideas, is beyond their
own grasp, and contains several of their sub-divisions, differentiated
by distinct native terms. The name for the ceremonial purchase of a
task or for the transfer of a garden plot is laga. This term denotes a
very big and important transaction. For example, when a small pig is
purchased by food or minor objects of value, they call this barter
(gimwali) but when a more valuable pig is exchanged for vaygu'a,
they call it laga.

The important conception of gradual acquisition in advance of
matrilineal inheritance, is designated by the term pokala, a word
which we have already met as signifying the tributes to the chief. It
is a homonym, because its two meanings are distinct, and are clearly
distinguished by the natives. There can be no doubt that these two
meanings have developed out of a common one by gradual differentiation,
but I have no data even to indicate this linguistic process. At
present, it would be incorrect to strain after any connection
between them, and indeed this is an example how necessary it is to
be careful not to rely too much on native terminology for purposes
of classification.

The term for the hire of a canoe is toguna waga.

6. Ceremonial barter with deferred payment.--In this class we have to
describe payments which are ceremonially offered, and must be received
and re-paid later on. The exchange is based on a permanent partnership,
and the articles have to be roughly equivalent in value. Remembering
the definition of the Kula in Chapter III, it is easy to see that
this big, ceremonial, circulating exchange belongs to this class. It
is ceremonial barter based on permanent partnership, where a gift
offered is always accepted, and after a time has to be re-paid by an
equivalent counter-gift.

There is also a ceremonial form of exchange of vegetable food for fish,
based on a standing partnership, and on the obligation to accept and
return an initial gift. This is called wasi. The members of an inland
village, where yams and taro are plentiful have partners in a Lagoon
village, where much fishing is done but garden produce is scarce. Each
man has his partner, and at times, when new food is harvested and
also during the main harvest, he and his fellow villagers will bring
a big quantity of vegetable food into the Lagoon village (see Plate
XXXVI), each man putting his share before his partner's house. This
is an invitation, which never can be rejected, to return the gift by
its fixed equivalent in fish.

As soon as weather and previous engagements allow, the fishermen go
out to sea and notice is given to the inland village of the fact. The
inlanders arrive on the beach, awaiting the fishermen, Who come back
in a body, and their haul of fish is taken directly from the canoes
and carried to the inland village. Such large quantities of fish
are always acquired only in connection with big distributions of
food (sagali). It is remarkable that in the inland villages these
distributions must be carried out in fish, whereas in the Lagoon
villages, fish never can be used for ceremonial purposes, vegetables
being the only article considered proper. Thus the motive for exchange
here is not to get food in order to satisfy the primary want of eating,
but in order to satisfy the social need of displaying large quantities
of conventionally sanctioned eatables. Often when such a big fishing
takes place, great quantities of fish perish by becoming rotten
before they reach the man for whom they are finally destined. But
being rotten in no way detracts from the value of fish in a sagali.

The equivalence of fish, given in return for vegetable food, is
measured only roughly. A standard sized bunch of taro, or one of the
ordinary baskets of taytu (small yams) will be repaid by a bundle of
fish, some three to five kilograms in weight. The equivalence of the
two payments, as well as the advantage obtained by one party at least,
make this exchange approach barter. [59] But the element of trust
enters into it largely, in the fact that the equivalence is left to
the repayer; and again, the initial gift which as a rule is always
given by the inlanders, cannot be refused. And all these features
distinguish this exchange from barter.

Similar to this ceremonial exchange are certain arrangements in which
food is brought by individuals to the industrial villages of Kuboma,
and the natives of that place return it by manufactured objects when
these are made. In certain cases of production of vaygu'a (valuables)
it is difficult to judge whether we have to do with the payment for
services rendered (Class 3), or with the type of ceremonial barter
belonging to this class. There is hardly any need to add that the two
types of exchange contained in this class, the Kula and the wasi (fish
barter) are kept very distinct in the minds of the natives. Indeed,
the ceremonial exchange of valuables, the Kula, stands out as such a
remarkable form of trade that in all respects, not only by the natives,
but also by ourselves, it must be put into a class by itself. There
is no doubt, however, that the technique of the wasi must have
been influenced by the ideas and usages of the Kula, which is by
far the more important and widespread of the two. The natives, when
explaining one of these trades, often draw parallels to the other. And
the existence of social partnership, of ceremonial sequence of gift,
of the free yet unevadible equivalence, all these features appear
in both forms. This shows that the natives have a definite mental
attitude towards what they consider an honourable, ceremonial type of
barter. The rigid exclusion of haggling, the formalities observed in
handing over the gift, the obligation of accepting the initial gift
and of returning it later on, all these express this attitude.

7. Trade, Pure and Simple.--The main characteristic of this form
of exchange is found in the element of mutual advantage: each side
acquires what is needed, and gives away a less useful article. Also
we find here the equivalence between the articles adjusted during
the transaction by haggling or bargaining.

This bartering, pure and simple, takes place mainly between the
industrial communities of the interior, which manufacture on a large
scale the wooden dishes, combs, lime pots, armlets and baskets and
the agricultural districts of Kiriwina, the fishing communities of
the West, and the sailing and trading communities of the South. The
industrials, who are regarded as pariahs and treated with contumely,
are nevertheless allowed to hawk their goods throughout the other
districts. When they have plenty of articles on hand, they go to
the other places, and ask for yams, coco-nuts, fish, and betel-nut,
and for some ornaments, such as turtle shell, earrings and spondylus
beads. They sit in groups and display their wares, saying "You have
plenty of coco-nuts, and we have none. We have made fine wooden
dishes. This one is worth forty nuts, and some betel-nut, and some
betel pepper." The others then may answer, "Oh, no, I do not want
it. You ask too much." "What will you give us?" An offer may be made,
and rejected by the pedlars, and so on, till a bargain is struck.

Again, at certain times, people from other villages may need some of
the objects made in Kuboma, and will go there, and try to purchase
some manufactured goods. People of rank as a rule will do it in the
manner described in the previous paragraph, by giving an initial gift,
and expecting a repayment. Others simply go and barter. As we saw
in the description of the kabigidoya, the Sinaketans and Vakutans
go there and purchase goods before each Kula expedition to serve for
the subsidiary trade.

Thus the conception of pure barter (gimwali) stands out very clearly,
and the natives make a definite distinction between this and other
forms of exchange. Embodied in a word, this distinction is made more
poignant still by the manner in which the word is used. When scornfully
criticising bad conduct in Kula, or an improper manner of giving gifts,
a native will say that "it was done like a gimwali." When asked,
about a transaction, whether it belongs to one class or another,
they will reply with an accent of depreciation "That was only a
gimwali--(gimwali wala!)" In the course of ethnographic investigation,
they give clear descriptions, almost definitions of gimwali, its lack
of ceremony, the permissibility of haggling, the free manner in which
it can be done between any two strangers. They state correctly and
clearly its general conditions, and they tell readily which articles
may be exchanged by gimwali.

Of course certain characteristics of pure barter, which we can
perceive clearly as inherent in the facts, are quite beyond their
theoretical grasp. Thus for instance, that the element of mutual
advantage is prominent in gimwali; that it refers exclusively to
newly manufactured goods, because second-hand things are never
gimwali, etc., etc. Such generalisations the ethnographer has to
make for himself. Other properties of the gimwali embodied in custom
are: absence of ceremonial, absence of magic, absence of special
partnership--all these already mentioned above. In carrying out the
transaction, the natives also behave quite differently here than in
the other transactions. In all ceremonial forms of give and take,
it is considered very undignified and against all etiquette, for the
receiver to show any interest in the gift or any eagerness to take
it. In ceremonial distributions as well as in the Kula, the present is
thrown down by the giver, sometimes actually, sometimes only given in
an abrupt manner, and often it is not even picked up by the receiver,
but by some insignificant person in his following. In the gimwali,
on the contrary, there is a pronounced interest shown in the exchange.

There is one instance of gimwali which deserves special attention. It
is a barter of fish for vegetables, and stands out in sharp contrast
therefore to the wasi, the ceremonial fish and yam exchange. It is
called vava, and takes place between villages which have no standing
wasi partnership and therefore simply gimwali their produce when
necessary (see Plate XXXVII).

This ends the short survey of the different types of exchange. It was
necessary to give it, even though in a condensed form, in order to
provide a background for the Kula. It gives us an idea of the great
range and variety of the material give and take associated with the
Trobriand tribal life. We see also that the rules of equivalence,
as well as the formalities accompanying each transaction, are very
well defined.




VII

It is easy to see that almost all the categories of gifts, which I
have classified according to economic principles, are also based
on some sociological relationship. Thus the first type of gifts,
that is, the free gifts, take place in the relationship between
husband and wife, and in that between parents and children. Again,
the second class of gifts, that is, the obligatory ones, given without
systematic repayment, are associated with relationship-in-law, mainly,
though the chief's tributes also belong to this class.

If we drew up a scheme of sociological relations, each type of them
would be defined by a special class of economic duties. There would
be some parallelism between such a sociological classification of
payments and presents, and the one given above. But such parallelism
is only approximate. It will be therefore interesting to draw up a
scheme of exchanges, classified according to the social relationship,
to which they correspond. This will give us good insight into the
economics of Trobriand sociology, as well as another view of the
subject of payments and presents.

Going over the sociological outline in Chapter II, Divisions V and VI,
we see that the family, the clan and sub-clan, the village community,
the district and the tribe are the main social divisions of the
Trobriands. To these groupings correspond definite bonds of social
relationship. Thus, to the family, there correspond no less than three
distinct types of relationship, according to native ideas. First of
all there is the matrilineal kinship (veyola) which embraces people,
who can trace common descent through their mothers. This is, to the
natives, the blood relationship, the identity of flesh, and the real
kinship. The marriage relation comprises that between husband and wife,
and father and children. Finally, the relationship between the husband
and the wife's matrilineal kinsmen forms the third class of personal
ties corresponding to family. These three types of personal bonds are
clearly distinguished in terminology, in the current linguistic usage,
in custom, and in explicitly formulated ideas.

To the grouping into clans and sub-clans, there pertain the ties
existing between clansmen and more especially between members of
the same sub-clan, and on the other hand, the relationship between a
man and members of different clans. Membership in the same sub-clan
is a kind of extended kinship. The relationship to other clans is
most important, where it assumes the form of special friendship
called luba'i. The grouping into village communities results in the
very important feature of fellow membership in the same village
community. The distinction of rank associated with clanship, the
division into village communities and districts, result, in the
manner sketched out in Chapter II, in the subordination of commoners
to chiefs. Finally, the general fact of membership in the tribe
creates the bonds which unite every tribesman with another and which
in olden days allowed of a free though not unlimited intercourse, and
therefore of commercial relations. We have, therefore, eight types of
personal relationship to distinguish. In the following table we see
them enumerated with a short survey of their economic characteristics.

1. Matrilineal kinship.--The underlying idea that this means identity
of blood and of substance is by no means forcibly expressed on its
economic side. The right of inheritance, the common participation
in certain titles of ownership, and a limited right to use one
another's implements and objects of daily use are often restricted
in practice by private jealousies and animosities. In economic gifts
more especially, we find here the remarkable custom of purchasing
during lifetime, by instalments, the titles to garden plots and trees
and the knowledge of magic, which by right ought to pass at death
from the older to the younger generation of matrilineal kinsmen. The
economic identity of matrilineal kinsmen comes into prominence at the
tribal distributions--sagali--where all of them have to share in the
responsibilities of providing food.

2. Marriage ties.--(Husband and wife; and derived from that, father and
children). It is enough to tabulate this type of relationship here,
and to remind the reader that it is characterised by free gifts, as
has been minutely described in the foregoing classification of gifts,
under (1).

3. Relationship-in-law.--These ties are in their economic aspect not
reciprocal or symmetrical. That is, one side in it, the husband of
the woman, is the economically favoured recipient, while the wife's
brothers receive from him gifts of smaller value in the aggregate. As
we know, this relationship is economically defined by the regular
and substantial harvest gifts, by which the husband's storehouse is
filled every year by his wife's brothers. They also have to perform
certain services for him. For all this, they receive a gift of vaygu'a
(valuables) from time to time, and some food in payment for services
rendered.

4. Clanship.--The main economic identification of this group takes
place during the sagali, although the responsibility for the food
rests only with those actually related by blood with the deceased
man. All the members of the sub-clan, and to a smaller extent members
of the same clan within a village community, have to contribute by
small presents given to the organisers of the sagali.

5. The Relationship of Personal Friendship.--Two men thus bound as
a rule will carry on Kula between themselves, and, if they belong to
an inland and Lagoon village respectively, they will be partners in
the exchange of fish and vegetables (wasi).

6. Fellow-citizenship in a Village Community.--There are many types
of presents given by one community to another. And, economically, the
bonds of fellow-citizenship mean the obligation to contribute one's
share to such a present. Again, at the mortuary divisions, sagali,
the fellow-villagers of clans, differing from the deceased man's,
receive a series of presents for the performance of mortuary duties.

7. Relationship between Chiefs and Commoners.--The tributes and
services given to a chief by his vassals on the one hand, and
the small but frequent gifts which he gives them, and the big and
important contribution which he makes to all tribal enterprises are
characteristic of this relationship.

8. Relationship between any two tribesmen.--This is characterised by
payments and presents, by occasional trade between two individuals,
and by the sporadic free gifts of tobacco or betel-nut which no man
would refuse to another unless they were on terms of hostility.

With this, the survey of gifts and presents is finished. The general
importance of give and take to the social fabric of Boyowan society,
the great amount of distinctions and sub-divisions of the various
gifts can leave no doubt as to the paramount rôle which economic acts
and motives play in the life of these natives.