IN THE AMPHLETTS--SOCIOLOGY OF THE KULA


I

Our party, sailing from the North, reach first the main island
of Gumasila, a tall, steep mountain with arched lines and great
cliffs, suggesting vaguely some huge Gothic monument. To the left,
a heavy pyramid, the island of Domdom, recedes behind the nearer
mountain as the travellers approach. The fleet now sails along the
westerly shore of Gumasila, on which side the jungle, interspersed
with bald patches, ascends a steep slope, ribbed with rocky ridges,
and creased by valleys which run at their foot into wide bays. Only
here and there can be seen triangular clearings, signs of cultivation
made by the natives from the other side of the island, where the two
villages are situated. At the South-West end of Gumasila, a narrow
promontory runs into a flat, low point with a sandy beach on both
sides. On the North side of the point, hidden from the villages,
the fleet comes to a halt, on the beach of Giyawana (called by the
Trobrianders Giyasila). This is the place where all the fleets,
arriving from the North, stop before approaching the villages. Here
also the inhabitants of the Amphletts rest for a day, after the
first false start they have made from the villages, and before they
actually set off for the Trobriands. This beach, in short, is the
Amphlettan counterpart of the sandbank Muwa. It was also here that I
surprised the Gumasilan canoes on a full moon night, in March, 1918,
after they had started to join the uvalaku expedition to Sinaketa.

On this beach, the Sinaketans perform the final stage of Kula magic,
before approaching their partners in Gumasila. The same magic will
be repeated before arriving in Dobu, and as a matter of fact, when
the objective of the big uvalaku is Dobu, the full and ceremonial
performance of the magic might usually be deferred till then. It
will be better therefore to postpone the description of this magic
till we have brought our fleet to the beach of Sarubwoyna. Here it
will be enough to mention that on occasions when magic is performed,
after an hour's or half hour's pause on the beach of Giyawana, all
the men get into their canoes, take the paddles and oars, and the
fleet sails round the point where, in a small, very picturesque bay,
there lies the smaller village of Gumasila, called Nu'agasi (see Plate
I). This village in olden days was perched on a narrow ledge some one
hundred metres above the sea level, a fastness difficult of access, and
overlooking all its approaches. Now, after the white man's influence
has rendered unnecessary all precautions against raiding parties,
the village has come down to the narrow strip of foreshore, a bridge
between the sea and a small swamp formed at the foot of the hill. Some
of the canoes will come to this beach, the others will sail further,
under a precipitous black rock of some 150 metres high and 300 metres
wide (see Plate XLII). Turning another corner, they arrive at the big
village of Gumasila, built on artificial stone terraces, surrounded
by dykes of small stones, forming square lagoons and diminutive
harbours (compare the description given above in Chapter I, Division
V). This is the old village which, practically inaccessible by sea,
formed a fastness of a different kind from the other, high-perched
villages typical of this district. Exposed to the full onslaught of
the South-Easterly winds and seas, against which it was protected by
its stone bulwarks and dykes, it was approachable only in all weathers
by a small channel to the South, where a big rock and a reef shelter
it from the rough waters.

Without any preliminary welcoming ceremony or formal reception,
the Sinaketan guests now leave their canoes and disperse among the
villagers, settle down in groups near the houses of their friends, and
engage in betel chewing and conversations. They speak in Kiriwinian,
a language which is universally known in the Amphletts. Almost as
soon as they go ashore, they give to their partners presents of pari
(opening gift), some small object, such as a comb, a lime pot, or
a lime stick. After that, they await some Kula gifts to be given
them. The most important headman will offer such a gift first to
Kouta'uya, or To'udawada, whichever of them is the toli'uvalaku of the
occasion. The soft, penetrating sound of a conch-shell soon announces
that the first gift has been given. Other blasts of conch-shells
follow, and the Kula is in full swing. But here again, what happens in
the Amphletts, is only a minor interlude to the Sinaketan adventurers,
bent on the bigger goal in Dobu. And in order for us to remain in
harmony with the native perspective we shall also wait for the detailed
and circumstantial description of the Kula proceedings till we arrive
on the beach of Tu'utauna, in Dobu. The concrete account of how such
a visiting fleet is received and behaves on arrival will be given,
when I describe a scene I saw with my own eyes in the village of
Nabwageta, another Amphlett island, when sixty Dobuan canoes arrived
there on their uvalaku, en route for Boyowa.

To give a definite idea of the conversations which take place between
the visitors and the Amphlettans, I shall give a sample noted down,
during a visit of some Trobrianders to Nu'agasi, the smaller village
of Gumasila. A few canoes had arrived a day or two before, in the
neighbouring island, Nabwageta, coming from the small Western islands
of the Trobriands on a Kula. One of them paddled across to Nu'agasi
with a crew of some six men, in order to offer pari gifts to their
partners and see what was to be done in the way of Kula. The canoe
was sighted from a distance, and its purpose was guessed at once,
as word had been brought before of the arrival in Nabwageta of this
small expedition. The headman of Nu'agasi, Tovasana, hurried back to
his house from my tent, where I was taking great pains to obtain some
ethnographic information from him.

Tovasana is an outspoken character, and he is the most important
headman in the Amphletts. I am not using the word 'chief,' for in
the Amphletts, as I have said, the natives do not observe either
the court ceremonial with crouching and bending, nor do the headmen
have any power or economic influence, at all comparable with those
of the Trobriands. Yet, although I came from the Trobriands, I was
struck by the authoritative tone used, and the amount of influence
evidently wielded by Tovasana. This is partly due undoubtedly to
the lack of white man's interference, which has so undermined native
authority and morality in the Trobriands, whereas the Amphletts have
so far escaped to a large extent Missionary teaching and Government
law and order. On the other hand, however, the very narrow sphere
of his powers, the authority over a small village, consolidates the
headman's influence. The oldest and the most aristocratic by descent
of all the headmen, he is their acknowledged 'doyen.'

In order to receive his visitors he went to the beach in front
of his house and sat there on a log, looking impassively over the
sea. When the Trobrianders arrived each man took a gift and went
to his partner's house. The chief did not rise to meet them, nor
did they come in a body to greet him. The toliwaga came towards the
place where Tovasana was sitting; he carried a bundle of taro and a
piece of gugu'a (objects of small value, such as combs, lime pots,
etc.). These he laid down near the seated headman, who, however,
took no notice of it. A small boy, a grandchild of Tovasana, I think,
took up the gifts and put them into his house. Then, without having
yet exchanged a word, the toliwaga sat down on the platform next to
Tovasana. Under a shady tree, which spread its branches like a canopy
above the bleached canoe, the men formed a picturesque group sitting
cross-legged on the platform. Beside the slim, youthful figure of the
Kaduwaga man, the old Tovasana, with his big, roughly carved features,
with his large aquiline nose sticking out from under an enormous
turban-like wig, looked like an old gnome. At first exchanging merely
a word or two, soon they dropped into more animated conversation,
and when other villagers and the rest of the visitors joined them,
the talk became general. As they spoke in Kiriwinian, I was able to
jot down the beginning of their conversation.


    Tovasana asked:

    "Where have you anchored?"

    "In Nabwageta."

    "When did you come?"

    "Yesterday."

    "From where did you start on the last day before arriving?"

    "From Gabuwana."

    "When?"

    "The day before yesterday."

    "What wind?"

    "Started from home with yavata; wind changed. Arrived on sandbank
    (Gabuwana); we slept; so-and-so made wind magic; wind changed
    again; good wind."

    Then Tovasana asked the visitors about one of the chiefs from
    the island of Kayleula (to the West of Kiriwina), and when he
    was going to give him a big pair of mwali. The man answered
    they do not know; to their knowledge that chief has no big mwali
    at present. Tovasana became very angry, and in a long harangue,
    lapsing here and there into the Gumasila language, he declared that
    he would never kula again with that chief, who is a topiki (mean
    man), who has owed him for a long time a pair of mwali as yotile
    (return gift), and who always is slow in making Kula. A string
    of other accusations about some clay pots given by Tovasana to
    the same chief, and some pigs promised and never given, were also
    made by the angry headman. The visitors listened to it with polite
    assent, uttering here and there some noncommital remark. They,
    in their turn, complained about some sago, which they had hoped
    to receive in Nabwageta, but which was churlishly refused for some
    reason or other to all the men of Kaduwaga, Kaysiga and Kuyawa.

    Tovasana then asked them, "How long are you going to stay?"

    "Till Dobu men come."

    "They will come," said Tovasana, "not in two days, not in three
    days, not in four days; they will come tomorrow, or at the very
    last, the day after tomorrow."

    "You go with them to Boyowa?"

    "I sail first to Vakuta, then to Sinaketa with the Dobu men. They
    sail to Susuwa beach to fish, I go to your villages, to Kaduwaga,
    to Kaysiga, to Kuyawa. Is there plenty of mwali in your villages?"

    "Yes, there are. So-and-so has..."

    Here followed a long string of personal names of big armshells,
    the approximate number of smaller, nameless ones, and the names
    of the people in whose possession they were at the time.


The interest of both hearers and speakers was very obvious,
and Tovasana gave the approximate dates of his movements to his
visitors. Full moon was approaching, and the natives have got names
for every day during the week before and after full moon, and the
following and preceding days can therefore be reckoned. Also, every
seven-day period within a moon is named after the quarter which falls
in it. This allows the natives to fix dates with a fair exactitude. The
present example shows the way in which, in olden times, the movements
of the various expeditions were known over enormous areas; nowadays,
when white men's boats with native crews often move from one island
to the other, the news spreads even more easily. In former times,
small preliminary expeditions such as the one we have just been
describing, would fix the dates and make arrangements often for as
much as a year ahead.

The Kaduwaga men next inquired as to whether any strangers from the
Trobriands were then staying in Gumasila. The answer was that there
was in the village one man from Ba'u, and one from Sinaketa. Then
inquiries were made as to how many Kula necklaces there were in
Gumasila, and the conversation drifted again into Kula technicalities.

It is quite customary for men from the Trobriands to remain
for a long time in the Amphletts, that is, from one expedition
to another. For some weeks or even months, they live in the
house of their partner, friend, or relative, careful to keep to
the customs of the country. They will sit about with the men of
the village and talk. They will help in the work and go out on
fishing expeditions. These latter will be specially attractive to a
Trobriander, a keen fisherman himself, who here finds an entirely
new type of this pursuit. Whether an expedition would be made on
one of the sandbanks, where the fishermen remain for a few days,
casting their big nets for dugong and turtle; or whether they would
go out in a small canoe, trying to catch the jumping gar fish with
a fishing kite; or throwing a fish trap into the deep sea--all these
would be a novelty to the Trobriander, accustomed only to the methods
suitable to the shallow waters of the Lagoon, swarming with fish.

In one point the Trobriander would probably find his sojourn in
the Amphletts uncongenial; he would be entirely debarred from any
intercourse with women. Accustomed in his country to easy intrigues,
here he has completely to abstain, not only from sexual relations with
women married or unmarried, but even from moving with them socially,
in the free and happy manner characteristic of Boyowa. One of my main
informants, Layseta, a Sinaketa man, who spent several years in the
Amphletts, confessed to me, not without shame and regret, that he
never succeeded in having any intrigues with the women there. To
save his face, he claimed that he had had several Amphlett belles
declaring their love to him, and offering their favours, but he always
refused them:


    "I feared; I feared the bowo'u of Gumasila; they are very bad."


The bowo'u are the local sorcerers of the Amphletts. Whatever we might
think about Layseta's temptations--and his personal appearance and
charm do not make his boastings very credible--and whether he was
afraid of sorcery or of a sound thrashing, the fact remains that a
Trobriander would have to change his usual mode of behaviour when
in the Amphletts, and keep away from the women entirely. When big
parties arrive in Gumasila, or Nabwageta, the women run away, and
camp in the bush till the beach is clear.

The Amphlettans, on the contrary, were used to receive favours from
unmarried women in Sinaketa. Nowadays, the male inhabitants of that
village, always disapproving of the custom, though not to the extent
of taking any action, tell the Amphlettans that the white man's
Government has prohibited the men from Gumasila and Nabwageta to
have sexual relations in Sinaketa. One of the very few occasions,
when the men from the Amphletts showed any interest in talking to me
was when they asked me whether this was true.


    "The Sinaketa men tell us that we will go to jail if we sleep
    with girls in Sinaketa. Would the Government put us into jail,
    in truth?"


As usually, I simply disclaimed all knowledge of the white man's
arcana in such matters.

The small party of Kaduwaga men, whose visit to Tovasana I have just
been describing, sat there for about two hours, smoked and chewed
betel-nut, the conversation flagging now and then, and the men looking
into the distance with the habitual self-important expression worn
on such occasions. After the final words about mutual plans were
exchanged, and a few pots had been brought by small boys to the canoe
as taio'i (farewell gift to the visitors), they embarked, and paddled
back three or four miles across to Nabwageta.

We must imagine the big Kula party from Sinaketa, whom we just watched
landing in the two villages of Gumasila, behaving more or less in the
same manner; conducting similar conversations, offering the same type
of pari gifts to their partners. Only everything happens of course on
a much bigger scale. There is a big group seated before each house,
parties walk up and down the village, the sea in front of it is covered
with the gaudy, heavily laden canoes. In the little village, of which
Tovasana is headman, the two chiefs, To'udawada and Kouta'uya, will
be seated on the same platform, on which we saw the old man receiving
his other guests. The other headmen of the Sinaketans will have gone
to the bigger village round the corner, and will encamp there under
the tall palms, looking across the straits towards the pyramidal forms
of Domdom, and further South, to the main island fronting them with
the majestic form of Koyatabu. Here, among the small houses on piles,
scattered picturesquely through the maze of little harbours, lagoons
and dykes, large groups of people will be seated on mats of plaited
coco-nut, each man as a rule under the dwelling of his partner,
chewing betel-nut stolidly, and watching stealthily the pots being
brought out to be presented to them, and still more eagerly awaiting
the giving of Kula gifts, although he remains to a superficial glance
quite impassive.




II

In Chapter III I spoke about the sociology of Kula, and gave a concise
definition of partnership with its functions and obligations. I said
there that people enter into this relationship in a definite manner,
and remain in it for the rest of their life. I also said that the
number of partners a man possesses, depends upon his social position
and rank. The protective character of an overseas partner becomes
now clearer, after we have realised the nervous tension with which
each Kula party in olden days would have approached a land full of
mulukwausi, bowo'u and other forms of sorcery, a land from which
originate the very tauva'u themselves. [70] To have a friend there,
one who will not on the surface of it have bad intentions, is a
great boon. What this really means to the natives can, however, only
be realised when we arrive at Dobu, learn the special safety magic
performed there and find how genuinely serious these apprehensions are.

We must now make another short digression from our consecutive account,
and discuss the several aspects of the sociology of the Kula one
after the other.

1. Sociological Limitations to the Participation in the Kula.--Not
everyone who lives within the cultural sphere of the Kula does
participate in it. More especially in the Trobriand Islands, there
are whole districts which do not practise the Kula. Thus a series of
villages in the North of the main Island, the villages on the Island of
Tuma, as well as the industrial villages of Kuboma and the agricultural
ones of Tilataula do not practise Kula. In villages like Sinaketa,
Vakuta, Gumasila and Nabwageta, every man carries on the Kula. The
same applies to the small Islands which link up the big gaps of the
Kula chain, the Islands of Kitava, Iwa, Gawa and Kwayawata, strewn on
the seas between the Trobriands and Woodlark Island, to Tubetube and
Wari, etc., etc. In the Dobuan speaking district, on the other hand,
I think that certain village complexes either do not practice Kula
at all, or else practice it on a small scale, that is, their headmen
have only a few partners in the neighbouring villages.

In some of the big chiefs' villages in Kiriwina there are certain
people who never practice Kula. Thus, in a village where the
headman has the rank of guya'u (chief) or gumguya'u (minor chief)
the commoners of the lowest rank and unrelated to the headman are
not supposed to carry on the Kula. In olden days this rule would be
very strictly observed, and nowadays even, though somewhat relaxed,
not many commoners of this description practice the Kula. Limitations
as to entry into the Kula, therefore, exist only in big Kula districts
such as that of Dobu and of the Trobriands, and they are partly local,
excluding whole villages, and partly social, excluding certain people
of low rank.

2. The Relation of Partnership.--The name for an overseas partner
is in the Trobriand language karayta'u; 'my partner' is styled ulo
karayta'u, ulo being the possessive pronoun of remote relation. In
Gumasila he is called ulo ta'u, which means simply 'my man'; in Dobuan,
yegu gumagi. The inland partners are known in Kiriwinian by the term
denoting a friend, 'lubaygu,' the suffixed possessive pronoun gu
being that of nearest possession.

Only after this relationship has been established between two men,
can the two make Kula with one another. An overseas visitor would
as a rule go to his partner's house and offer him a small present
as pari. This again would be returned by the local man by means of
a talo'i present. There would not be any great intimacy between two
overseas partners. But, in sharp contrast to the essential hostility
between two strange tribesmen, such a relationship of friendship would
stand out as the most remarkable deviation from the general rule. In
inland relations between two partners of neighbouring villages, the
closeness and intimacy would be relatively small as compared to other
ties. This relation was defined to me in these words:


    "My partner same as my clansman (kakaveyogu)--he might fight
    me. My real kinsman (veyogu), same navelstring, would always side
    with us."


The best way of obtaining detailed information, and of eliminating
any errors which might have crept into ethnographic generalisations,
is to collect concrete data. I have drawn up a complete list of the
partners of Kouta'uya, who is one of the biggest Kula men in the
whole Ring; another list of a smaller Sinaketa headman, Toybayoba;
and of course I know several complements of partners of smaller men,
who, as a rule, have about four to six partners each.

The full list of Kouta'uya includes fifty-five men in the Northern
Half of Boyowa, that is, in Luba, Kulumata and Kiriwina. From these
the chief receives armshells. To the South, his partners in the
Southern districts of Boyowa and Vakuta are twenty-three by number;
in the Amphletts eleven, and twenty-seven in Dobu. Thus we see that the
numbers to the South and North almost balance, the Southern exceeding
the Northern by six. These numbers include his partners in Sinaketa,
where he makes Kula with all his fellow chiefs, and with all the
headmen of the divisional villages, and in his own little village
he kulas with his sons. But even there, everyone of his partners is
either South or North to him, that is, either gives him the necklaces
or armshells.

All the clans are represented in the list. Often when asked with
regard to the name of some man, why he is in partnership with him,
the answer would be--"Because he is my kinsman," which means, in
this case, clansman of equal rank. Men of other clans are included,
as 'friends' or relatives-in-law, or for some other reason more or
less imaginary. I shall speak presently of the mechanism through
which the man enters on this relation.

The list of Toybayoba's partners includes twelve men to the North,
four in Southern Boyowa, three in the Amphletts and eleven in Dobu,
the balance here also being on the Southern side. As said above,
minor men might have anything between four to ten partners all told,
whereas there are men in northern Boyowa who have only two partners,
one on each side of the ring, so to speak, with whom they make Kula.

In drawing up these lists, which I shall not reproduce here in
extenso, another striking feature comes to light: on both sides,
there is a definite geographical limit, beyond which a man cannot have
any partners. For all men in the village of Sinaketa, for instance,
this limit, as regards the armshells, coincides with the furthest
boundary of Kiriwina; that is, no man from Sinaketa has any partners
in Kitava, which is the next Kula district beyond Kiriwina. South,
in the direction from which the soulava are received, the villages
at the South-East end of Fergusson Island are the last places where
partners of Sinaketan men are still to be found. The small Island of
Dobu itself lies just beyond this boundary, and no man in this Island
or in any of the villages on Normanby Island makes Kula with the
Sinaketans (compare the circles, indicating Kula Communities on Map V).

Beyond these districts, the men still know the names of what could be
called their partners-once-removed, that is, the partners of their
partners. In the case of a man who has only a couple of partners on
each side, who, again being modest men, have also only one or two,
this relationship is not devoid of importance. If I, in Sinaketa, have
one partner, say in Kiriwina, who again has one partner in Kitava, it
is no small matter for me to learn that this Kitava man just obtained
a splendid pair of armshells. For this means that there is about a
quarter of a chance of my receiving these armshells, on the supposition
that the Kitavan and Kiriwinian have two partners each between whom
they can choose in bestowing them. In the case of a big chief like
Kouta'uya, however, the number of once-removed partners becomes so
great that they lose any personal significance for him. Kouta'uya has
some twenty-five partners in Kiriwina; among them To'uluwa, the big
chief, makes Kula with more than half of all the men in Kitava. Some
other of Kouta'uya's partners in Kiriwina, of lesser rank, yet quite
important, also make Kula with a great number, so that probably
practically everybody in Kitava is Kouta'uya's partner-once-removed.

If we were to imagine that on the Kula Ring there are many people who
have only one partner on each side, then the Ring would consist of a
large number of closed circuits, on each of which the same articles
would constantly pass. Thus if A in Kiriwina always kulas with B in
Sinaketa who kulas with C in Tubetube, who kulas with D in Murua,
who kulas with E in Kitava, who kulas with A in Kiriwina, then A B
C D E F would form such one strand in the big Kula circuit. If an
armshell got into the hands of one of them, it could never leave this
strand. But the Kula Ring is nothing approaching this, because every
small Kula partner has, as a rule, on one side or the other, a big one,
that is a chief. And every chief plays the part of a shunting-station
for Kula objects. Having so many partners on each side, he constantly
transfers an object from one strand to another. Thus, any article which
on its rounds has travelled through the hands of certain men, may on
its second round come through an entirely different channel. This,
of course, supplies a large part of the zest and excitement of the
Kula exchange.

The designation of such a partner-once-removed in the language of
Kiriwina is muri-muri. A man will say that such and such a one is 'my
partner-once-removed,' 'ulo murimuri.' Another expression connected
with this relationship is to inquire 'whose hand' has passed on
such and such a vaygu'a. When To'uluwa gives a pair of armshells to
Kouta'uya, this latter will ask: 'availe yamala' ('whose hand')? The
answer is 'yamala Pwata'i,' ('the hand of Pwata'i'). And, as a rule,
more or less the following conversation will ensue: "who gave this
pair of armshells to Pwata'i?" "how long were they kept by a man in
the Island of Yeguma, and then distributed on the occasion of a so'i
(feast)?" "when they had been the last time in Boyowa?" etc., etc.

3. Entering the Kula Relationship.--In order to become a practising
member of the Kula, a man must have passed the stage of adolescence; he
must have the status and rank required, that is in such villages where
this condition is demanded; he must know the magic of the Kula; and
last, not least, he must be in possession of a piece of vaygu'a. The
membership, with all its concomitant implications, may be received
from the father, who teaches his son the magic, gives him a piece of
vaygu'a, and provides him with a partner, very often in his own person.

Supposing one of the sons of Kouta'uya has reached the stage where
a lad may begin to kula. The chief will have been teaching him the
spells for some time already. Moreover the lad, who from childhood
has taken part in overseas expeditions, has many a time seen the
rites performed and heard the spells uttered. When the time is ripe,
Kouta'uya, having the conch-shell blown, and with all due formalities,
presents a soulava to his son. This latter, soon afterwards, goes
somewhere North. Perhaps he goes only to one of the neighbouring
villages within Sinaketa, perhaps he accompanies his father on a
visit as far North as Omarakana, and in any case he makes Kula,
either with one of his father's friends and partners, or with a
special friend of his own. Thus, at one stroke, the lad is equipped
with magic, vaygu'a, and two partners, one of whom is his father. His
northern partner will give him in due course an armshell, and this
he will probably offer to his father. The transactions once started
continue. His father soon gives him another vaygu'a, which he may kula
with the same northern partner, or he may try to establish another
partnership. The next mwali (armshells) he receives from the North, he
will probably give to another partner in the South, and thus establish
a new relationship. A chief's son, who is always a commoner himself
(since the chief cannot marry within his own sub-clan and the son has
the status of his mother), would not multiply his partners beyond the
limit numerically given by the above mentioned partners of Toybayoba.

Not everyone, however, is as fortunate as to be the son of a chief,
which in the Trobriands is, on the whole, one of the most enviable
positions, since it confers many privileges, and entails no special
responsibilities. A young chief himself would have to pay substantially
for establishing his position in the Kula, for a chief is always
the son of a woman of high rank, and the nephew of a chief, though
his father may be a commoner of small influence only. In any case,
his maternal uncle will expect from him some pokala (offerings by
instalment), in payment for magic, vaygu'a, and finally for a leading
position in the Kula. The young chief would marry, and thus acquire
wealth within limits, and with this he would have to give presents
to his maternal uncle, who in turn would introduce him into the Kula,
exactly as a chief does his son, only not disinterestedly.

A commoner enters into the Kula like a chief, with the only exception
that everything is on a smaller scale, the amount of the pokala
which he gives to his maternal uncle, the vaygu'a which he receives,
and the number of partners with whom he kulas. When a man gives
to another a piece of vaygu'a, of the Kula kind, but not as a Kula
exchange but as a gift, let us say as youlo (gift in repayment for
the harvest supply offerings, see above, Chapter VI, Division VI),
this vaygu'a does not leave the Kula Ring. The receiver, if he had
not been in the Kula yet, enters into it by acquiring the vaygu'a,
and can then choose his partner, and go on with the exchange.

There is one important qualification of the statement made at the
beginning of this section. I said there that a man entering the Kula
Ring, must learn the mwasila magic. This refers only to those who
practise overseas Kula. For people who do only the inland exchange,
magic is not necessary, and in fact it is never learned by them.

4. Participation of Women in the Kula.--As I have said in the
general descriptive chapter on the Kula tribes, the position of
women among them is by no means characterised by oppression or social
insignificance. They have their own sphere of influence, which, in
certain cases and in certain tribes, is of great importance. The Kula,
however, is essentially a man's type of activity. As mentioned above,
in the section between Sinaketa and Dobu, women do not sail on the
big expeditions. From Kiriwina young, unmarried girls would sail East
to Kitava, Iwa, and Gawa, and from these Islands even old, married
women, indeed whole families, come to Kiriwina. But they do not carry
on overseas Kula exchange, neither among themselves, nor with men.

In Kiriwina, some women, notably the chief's wives, are admitted to
the honour and privilege of exchanging vaygu'a, though in such cases
the transactions are done en famille. To take a concrete case, in
October or November, 1915, To'uluwa, the chief of Omarakana, brought
a fine haul of mwali from Kitava. The best pair of these he presented
to his veteran wife, Bokuyoba, a wife whom he had inherited from his
elder brother Numakala. Bokuyoba in turn gave the pair, without much
delay, to Kadamwasila, the favourite wife of the chief, the mother
of five sons and one daughter. She again gave it to her son, Namwana
Guyau, who kula'd it on to some of his southern partners. Next time
he receives a soulava necklace, he will give it, not to his father
directly, but to his mother, who will hand it over to her senior
colleague, and this venerable lady will give it to To'uluwa. The
whole transaction is evidently a complimentary interpolation of the
two giyovila (chief's wives) in between the simple transaction of
the chief giving the vaygu'a to his son. This interpolation gives the
women much pleasure, and is highly valued by them. In fact, at that
time I heard more about that than about all the rest of the exchanges
associated with this overseas trip.

In Southern Boyowa, that is in Sinaketa and Vakuta, the rôle of women
is similar, but they play besides another part. A man would sometimes
send his wife with a Kula gift to his partner in the neighbouring
village. On some occasions, when he needs vaygu'a very badly, as for
instance when he is expecting some uvalaku visitors, his wife may help
him to obtain the vaygu'a from that partner. For, though this latter
might refuse to give it to his Sinaketan partner, he would not do so
to his wife. It must be added that no sexual motives are associated
with it, and that it is only a sort of customary compliment paid to
the fair sex.

In Dobu, the wife, or the sister of a man, is always credited with a
great influence over his Kula decisions. Therefore, there is a special
form of magic, used by the Sinaketans, in order to act on the minds
of the Dobuan women. Although, in matters of sex, a Trobriander would
have absolutely to keep aloof from Dobuan women, married or unmarried,
he would approach them with nice speeches and gifts in matters of
Kula. He would reproach an unmarried girl with her brother's conduct
towards him. She would then ask for a piece of betel-nut. This would
be given with some magic spoken over it, and the girl, it is believed,
would then influence her brother to kula with his partner. [71]




III

In the short outline of the Amphlett tribe which was given in