THE DEPARTURE OF AN OVERSEAS EXPEDITION


We have brought the Kula narrative to the point where all the
preparations have been made, the canoe is ready, its ceremonial
launching and presentation have taken place, and the goods for the
subsidiary trade have been collected. It remains only to load the
canoes and to set sail. So far, in describing the construction, the
tasasoria and kabigidoya, we spoke of the Trobrianders in general. Now
we shall have to confine ourselves to one district, the southern part
of the Island, and we shall follow a Kula expedition from Sinaketa to
Dobu. For there are some differences between the various districts and
each one must be treated separately. What is said of Sinaketa, however,
will hold good so far as the other southern community, that of Vakuta,
is concerned. The scene, therefore, of all that is described in the
following two chapters will be set in one spot, that is, the group of
some eight component villages lying on the flat, muddy shore of the
Trobriand Lagoon, within about a stone's throw of one another. There
is a short, sandy beach under a fringe of palm trees, and from there
we can take a comprehensive view of the Lagoon, the wide semi-circle
of its shore edged with the bright green of mangroves, backed by the
high jungle on the raised coral ridge of the Raybwag. A few small,
flat islands on the horizon just faintly thicken its line, and on a
clear day the mountains of the d'Entrecasteaux are visible as blue
shadows in the far distance.

From the beach, we step directly into one of the villages, a row of
houses faced by another of yam-stores. Through this, leaving on our
right a circular village, and passing through some empty spaces with
groves of betel and coco-nut palms, we come to the main component
village of Sinaketa, to Kasiyetana. There, overtopping the elegant
native huts, stands an enormous corrugated iron shed, built on piles,
but with the space between the floor and the ground filled up carefully
with white coral stones. This monument testifies both to native vanity
and to the strength of their superstitions--vanity in aping the white
man's habit of raising the house, and native belief in the fear of the
bwaga'u (sorcerer), whose most powerful sorcery is applied by burning
magical herbs, and could not be warded off, were he able to creep
under the house. It may be added that even the missionary teachers,
natives of the Trobriands, always put a solid mass of stones to fill
the space beneath their houses. To'udawada, the chief of Kasiyetana,
is, by the way, the only man in Boyowa who has a corrugated iron
house, and in fact in the whole of the island there are not more
than a dozen houses which are not built exactly according to the
traditional pattern. To'udawada is also the only native whom I ever
saw wearing a sun-helmet; otherwise he is a decent fellow (physically
quite pleasant looking), tall, with a broad, intelligent face. Opposite
his iron shanty are the fine native huts of his four wives.

Walking towards the North, over the black soil here and there pierced
by coral, among tall trees and bits of jungle, fields and gardens,
we come to Kanubayne, the village of Kouta'uya, the second most
important chief in Sinaketa. Very likely we shall see him sitting on
the platform of his hut or yam-house, a shrivelled up, toothless old
man, wearing a big native wig. He, as well as To'udawada, belongs
to the highest ranks of chieftainship, and they both consider
themselves the equals of the chiefs of Kiriwina. But the power of
each one is limited to his small, component village, and neither in
ceremonial nor in wealth did they, at least in olden days, approach
their kinsmen in the North. There is still another chief of the same
rank in Sinaketa, who governs the small village of Oraywota. This is
Sinakadi, a puffed up, unhealthy looking, bald and toothless old man,
and a really contemptible and crooked character, despised by black and
white alike. He has a well-established reputation of boarding white
men's boats as soon as they arrive, with one or two of his young wives
in the canoe, and of returning soon after, alone, but with plenty of
tobacco and good merchandise. Lax as is the Trobriander's sense of
honour and morality in such matters, this is too much even for them,
and Sinakadi is accordingly not respected in his village.

The rest of the villages are ruled by headmen of inferior rank, but
of not much less importance and power than the main chiefs. One of
them, a queer old man, spare and lame but with an extremely dignified
and deliberate manner, called Layseta, is renowned for his extensive
knowledge of all sorts of magic, and for his long sojourns in foreign
countries, such as the Amphletts and Dobu. We shall meet some of these
chiefs later on in our wanderings. Having described the villages and
headmen of Sinaketa let us return to our narrative.

A few days before the appointed date of the departure of the Kula
expedition there is a great stir in the villages. Visiting parties
arrive from the neighbourhood, bringing gifts mostly of food, to serve
as provisions for the journey. They sit in front of the huts, talking
and commenting, while the local people go about their business. In
the evenings, long conferences are held over the fires, and late hours
are kept. The preparation of food is mainly woman's work, whereas the
men put the finishing touches to the canoes, and perform their magic.

Sociologically the group of the departing differentiates itself of
course from those who remain. But even within that group a further
differentiation takes place, brought about by their respective
functions in the Kula. First of all there are the masters of the
canoe, the toliwaga, who will play quite a definite part for the next
few weeks. On each of them fall with greater stringency the taboos,
whether those that have to be kept in Sinaketa or in Dobu. Each has
to perform the magic and act in ceremonies. Each will also enjoy the
main honours and privileges of the Kula. The members of the crew, the
usagelu, some four to six men in each canoe, form another group. They
sail the craft, perform certain magical rites, and as a rule do the
Kula each on his own account. A couple of younger men in each canoe,
who do not yet kula, but who help in the work of sailing, form another
class, and are called silasila. Here and there a small boy will go
with his father on a Kula expedition--such are called dodo'u--and
makes himself useful by blowing the conch shell. Thus the whole
fleet consists of four classes, that of the toliwaga, the usagelu,
the helpers and the children. From Sinaketa, women, whether married or
unmarried, never go on overseas expeditions, though a different custom
prevails in the eastern part of the Trobriands. Each toliwaga has to
give a payment in food to his usagelu, and this is done in the form of
a small ceremony of distribution of food called mwalolo, and held after
the return from the expedition, in the central place of the village.

A few days before the sailing, the toliwaga starts his series of
magical rites and begins to keep his taboos, the women busy themselves
with the final Preparation of the food, and the men trim the waga
(canoe) for the imminent, long journey.

The taboo of the toliwaga refers to his sexual life. During the last
two nights, he has in any case to be up late in connection with his
magical performances, and with the visits of his friends and relatives
from other villages, who bring provisions for the voyage, presents
in trade goods, and who chat about the forthcoming expedition. But he
has also to keep vigil far into the night as a customary injunction,
and he has to sleep alone, though his wife may sleep in the same house.

The preparations of the canoe are begun by covering it with plaited
mats called yawarapu. They are put on the platform, thus making
it convenient for walking, sitting and spreading about of small
objects. This, the first act of canoe trimming, is associated with a
magical rite. The plaited leaves are chanted over by the toliwaga on
the shore as they are put on the canoe. Or, in a different system of
Kula magic the toliwaga medicates some ginger root and spits it on
the mats in his hut. This is a specimen of the magical formula which
would be used in such a rite:


                            YAWARAPU SPELL.

    "Betel-nut, betel-nut, female betel-nut; betel-nut, betel-nut,
    male betel-nut; betel-nut of the ceremonial spitting!"

    "The chiefs' comrades; the chiefs and their followers; their
    sun, the afternoon sun; their pig, a small pig. One only is
    my day"--here the reciter utters his own name--"their dawn,
    their morning."

    This is the exordium of the spell. Then follows the main body. The
    two words boraytupa and badederuma, coupled together, are repeated
    with a string of other words. The first word of the couple means,
    freely translated, 'quick sailing,' and the second one, 'abundant
    haul.' The string of words which are in succession tacked on
    to this couple describe various forms of Kula necklaces. The
    necklaces of different length and of different finish have each
    their own class names, of which there are about a dozen. After
    that, a list of words, referring to the human head, are recited:

    "My head, my nose, my occiput, my tongue, my throat, my larynx,
    etc., etc." Finally, the various objects carried on a Kula
    expedition are mentioned. The goods to be given (pari); a ritually
    wrapped up bundle (lilava); the personal basket; the sleeping mat;
    big baskets; the lime stick; the lime pot and comb are uttered
    one after the other.

    Finally the magician recites the end part of the spell;
    "I shall kick the mountain, the mountain moves, the mountain
    tumbles down, the mountain starts on its ceremonial activities,
    the mountain acclaims, the mountain falls down, the mountain lies
    prostrate! My spell shall go to the top of Dobu Mountain, my spell
    will penetrate the inside of my canoe. The body of my canoe will
    sink; the float of my canoe will get under water. My fame is like
    thunder, my treading is like the roar of the flying witches."


The first part of this spell contains a reference to the betel-nut,
this being one of the things which the natives expect to receive in
the Kula. On the other hand, it is one of the substances which the
natives charm over and give to the partner to induce him to kula with
them. To which of these two acts the spell refers, it is impossible
to decide, nor can the natives tell it. The part in which he extols
his speed and success are typical of the magic formulæ, and can be
found in many others.

The main part of the spell is as usual much easier to interpret. It
implies, broadly speaking, the declaration: "I shall speed and be
successful with regard to the various forms of vaygu'a; I shall speed
and be successful with my head, with my speech, with my appearance;
in all my trade goods and personal belongings." The final part of the
spell describes the impression which is to be made by the man's magic
upon 'the mountain,' which stands here for the district of Dobu and
its inhabitants. In fact, the districts in the d'Entrecasteaux to which
they are sailing are always called koya (mountain). The exaggerations,
the metaphors, and the implicit insistence on the power of the spell
are very characteristic of all magical spells.

The next day, or the day after, as there is often a delay in starting,
a pig or two are given by the master of the expedition to all the
participants. In the evening of that day, the owner of each canoe goes
into the garden, and finds an aromatic mint plant (sulumwoya). Taking
a sprig of it into his hand, he moves it to and fro, uttering a spell,
and then he plucks it. This is the spell:


                         SULUMWOYA SPELL. [60]

    "Who cuts the sulumwoya of Laba'i? I, Kwoyregu, with my father,
    we cut the sulumwoya of Laba'i! The roaring sulumwoya, it roars;
    the quaking sulumwoya, it quakes; the soughing sulumwoya, it
    soughs; the boiling sulumwoya, it boils."

    "My sulumwoya, it boils, my lime spoon, it boils, my lime pot, it
    boils, my comb ... my basket ... my small basket ... my mat ... my
    lilava bundle ... my presentation goods (pari) ..." And with each
    of these terms, the word 'boils' or 'foams up' is repeated often
    several times. After that, the same verb 'it boils' is repeated
    with all parts of the head, as in the previously quoted formula.

    The last part runs thus: "Recently deceased spirit of my
    maternal uncle Mwoyalova, breathe thy spell over the head of
    Monikiniki. Breathe the spell upon the head of my light canoe. I
    shall kick the mountain; the mountain tilts over; the mountain
    subsides; the mountain opens up; the mountain jubilates; it
    topples over. I shall kula so as to make my canoe sink. I shall
    kula so as to make my outrigger go under. My fame is like thunder,
    my treading is like the roar of the flying witches."


The exordium of this spell contains some mythical references, of which,
however, my informants could give me only confused explanations. But
it is clear in so far as it refers directly to the magical mint,
and describes its magical efficiency. In the second part, there is
again a list of words referring to objects used in the Kula, and to
the personal appearance and persuasiveness of the magician. The verb
with which they are repeated refers to the boiling of the mint and
coco-nut oil which I shall presently have to mention, and it indicates
that the magical properties of the mint are imparted to the toliwaga
and his goods. In the last part, the magician invokes the spirit of
his real maternal kinsman, from whom he obtained this spell, and
asks him to impart magical virtue to his canoe. The mythological
name, Monikiniki, with which there is no myth connected, except
the tradition that he was the original owner of all these spells,
stands here as synonym of the canoe. At the very end in the dogina,
which contains several expressions identical with those in the end
part of the Yawarapu spell, we have another example of the strongly
exaggerated language so often used in magic.

After having thus ritually plucked the mint plant, the magician
brings it home. There he finds one of his usagelu (members of crew)
who helps him by boiling some coco-nut oil (bulami) in a small native
clay pot. Into the boiling oil the mint plant is put, and, while it
boils, a magical formula is uttered over it.


                           KAYMWALOYO SPELL.

    "No betel-nut, no doga (ornament of circular boar's tusk),
    no betel-pod! My power to change his mind; my mwasila magic,
    my mwase, mwasare, mwaserewai." This last sentence contains a
    play on words very characteristic of Kiriwinian magic. It is
    difficult to interpret the opening sentence. Probably it means
    something like this: "No betel-nut or pod, no gift of a doga,
    can be as strong as my mwasila and its power of changing my
    partner's mind in my favour!"

    Now comes the main part of the spell: "There is one sulumwoya
    (mint) of mine, a sulumwoya of Laba'i which I shall place on top
    of Gumasila."

    "Thus shall I make a quick Kula on top of Gumasila; thus shall I
    hide away my Kula on top of Gumasila; thus shall I rob my Kula on
    top of Gumasila; thus shall I forage my Kula on top of Gumasila;
    thus shall I steal my Kula on top of Gumasila."

    These last paragraphs are repeated several times, inserting
    instead of the name of the island of Gumasila the following
    ones: Kuyawaywo, Domdom, Tewara, Siyawawa, Sanaroa, Tu'utauna,
    Kamsareta, Gorebubu. All these are the successive names of places
    in which Kula is made. In this long spell, the magician follows
    the course of a Kula expedition, enumerating its most conspicuous
    landmarks. The last part in this formula is identical with the
    last part of the Yawarapu Spell, previously quoted: "I shall kick
    the mountain, etc."


After the recital of this spell over the oil and mint, the magician
takes these substances, and places them in a receptacle made of banana
leaf toughened by grilling. Nowadays a glass bottle is sometimes used
instead. The receptacle is then attached to a stick thrust through the
prow boards of the canoe and protruding slantwise over the nose. As
we shall see later on, the aromatic oil will be used in anointing
some objects on arrival at Dobu.

With this, however, the series of magical rites is not finished. The
next day, early in the morning, the ritual bundle of representative
trade goods, called lilava, is made up with the recital of a magical
spell. A few objects of trade, a plaited armlet, a comb, a lime pot,
a bundle of betel-nut are placed on a clean, new mat, and into the
folded mat the spell is recited. Then the mat is rolled up, and over
it another mat is placed, and one or two may be wrapped round; thus it
contains, hermetically sealed, the magical virtue of the spell. This
bundle is placed afterwards in a special spot in the centre of the
canoe, and is not opened till the expedition arrives in Dobu. There is
a belief that a magical portent (kariyala) is associated with it. A
gentle rain, accompanied by thunder and lightning, sets in whenever
the lilava is opened. A sceptical European might add, that in the
monsoon season it almost invariably rains on any afternoon, with the
accompaniment of thunder, at the foot or on the slopes of such high
hills as are found in the d'Entrecasteaux group. Of course when, in
spite of that, a kariyala does not make its appearance, we all know
something has been amiss in the performance of the magical rite over
the lilava! This is the spell recited over the tabooed lilava bundle.


                             LILAVA SPELL.

    "I skirt the shore of the beach of Kaurakoma; the beach of Kayli,
    the Kayli of Muyuwa." I cannot add any explanation which would
    make this phrase clearer. It obviously contains some mythological
    references to which I have no key. The spell runs on:

    "I shall act magically on my mountain... Where shall I lie? I
    shall lie in Legumatabu; I shall dream, I shall have dream visions;
    rain will come as my magical portent... his mind is on the alert;
    he lies not, he sits not, he stands up and trembles, he stands
    up and is agitated; the renown of Kewara is small, my own renown
    flares up..."

    This whole period is repeated over and over again, each time
    the name of another place being inserted instead of that of
    Legumatabu. Legumatabu is a small coral island some two hundred
    yards long and a hundred yards wide, with a few pandanus trees
    growing on it, wild fowl and turtle laying their eggs in its
    sand. In this island, half way between Sinaketa and the Amphletts,
    the Sinaketan sailors often spend a night or two, if overtaken
    by bad weather or contrary winds.

    This period contains first a direct allusion to the magical
    portent of the lilava. In its second half it describes the state
    of agitation of the Dobuan partner under the influence of this
    magic, a state of agitation which will prompt him to be generous
    in the Kula. I do not know whether the word Kewara is a proper
    name or what else it may mean, but the phrase contains a boast
    of the magician's own renown, very typical of magical formulæ.

    The localities mentioned instead of Legumatabu in the successive
    repetitions of the period are: Yakum, another small coral
    island, Urasi, the Dobuan name for Gumasila, Tewara, Sanaro'a,
    and Tu'utauna, all localities known to us already from our
    description of Dobu.

    This is a very long spell. After the recital, and a very lengthy
    one, of the last period with its variants, yet another change
    is introduced into it. Instead of the first phrase "where shall
    I lie? etc." the new form runs "Where does the rainbow stand
    up? It stands up on the top of Koyatabu," and after this the
    rest of the period is repeated: "I shall dream, I shall have
    dream visions, etc." This new form is again varied by uttering
    instead of Koyatabu, Kamsareta, Koyava'u, and Gorebubu. [61] This
    again carries us through the landscape; but here, instead of the
    sleeping places we follow the beacons of the sailing expedition
    by mentioning the tops of the high mountains. The end part of
    this spell is again identical with that of the Yawarapu Spell.


This magical rite takes place on the morning of the last
day. Immediately after the recital of the spell, and the rolling up
of the lilava, it is carried to the canoe, and put into its place of
honour. By that time the usagelu (members of the crew) have already
made the canoe ready for sailing.

Each masawa canoe is divided into ten, eleven, or twelve compartments
by the stout, horizontal poles called riu, which join the body of the
canoe with the outrigger. Such a compartment is called liku, and each
liku has its name and its function. Starting from the end of the canoe,
the first liku, which, as is easily seen, is both narrow and shallow,
is called ogugwau, 'in the mist,' and this is the proper place for
the conch-shell. Small boys will sit there and blow the conch-shell
on ceremonial occasions.

The next compartment is called likumakava, and there some of the food
is stowed away. The third division is called kayliku and water-bottles
made of coco-nut shells have their traditional place in it. The fourth
liku, called likuguya'u, is, as its name indicates, the place for
the guya'u or chief, which, it may be added, is unofficially used as
a courtesy title for any headman, or man of importance. The baler,
yalumila, always remains in this compartment. Then follow the central
compartments, called gebobo, one, two or three, according to the
size of the canoe. This is the place where the lilava is put on the
platform, and where are placed the best food, not to be eaten till
the arrival in Dobu, and all valuable trade articles. After that
central division, the same divisions, as in the first part are met
in inverse order (see Plate XXXIX).

When the canoe is going to carry much cargo, as is always the case on
an expedition to Dobu, a square space is fenced round corresponding
to the gebobo part of the canoe. A big sort of square hen-coop, or
cage, is thus erected in the middle of the canoe, and this is full
of bundles wrapped up in mats, and at times when the canoe is not
travelling, it is usually covered over with a sail. In the bottom of
the canoe a floor is made by a framework of sticks. On this, people
can walk and things can rest, while the bilgewater flows underneath,
and is baled out from time to time. On this framework, in the gebobo,
four coco-nuts are placed, each in the corner of the square, while a
spell is recited over them. It is after that, that the lilava and the
choice food, and the rest of the trade are stowed away. The following
spell belongs to the class which is recited over the four coco-nuts.


                             GEBOBO SPELL.

    "My father, my mother ... Kula, mwasila." This short exordium,
    running in the compressed style proper to magical beginnings, is
    rather enigmatic, except for the mention of the Kula and mwasila,
    which explain themselves. The second part is less obscure:

    "I shall fill my canoe with bagido'u, I shall fill my canoe with
    bagiriku, I shall fill my canoe with bagidudu, etc." All the
    specific names of the necklaces are enumerated. The last part runs
    as follows: "I shall anchor in the open sea, and my renown will go
    to the Lagoon, I shall anchor in the Lagoon, and my renown will go
    to the open sea. My companions will be on the open sea and on the
    Lagoon. My renown is like thunder, my treading is like earthquake."


This last part is similar to several of the other formulæ. This rite
is obviously a Kula rite, judging from the spell, but the natives
maintain that its special virtue is to make the food stuffs, loaded
into the canoe, last longer. After this rite is over, the loading is
done quickly, the lilava is put into its place of honour, and with it
the best food to be eaten in Dobu. Some other choice food to serve
as pokala (offerings) is also put in the gebobo, to be offered to
overseas partners; on it, the rest of the trade, called pari, is piled,
and right on top of all are the personal belongings of the usagelu and
the toliwaga in their respective baskets, shaped like travelling bags.

The people from the inland villages, kulila'odila, as they are called,
are assembled on the beach. With them stand the women, the children,
the old men, and the few people left to guard the village. The master
of the fleet gets up and addresses the crowd on the shore, more or
less in these words:


    "Women, we others sail; you remain in the village and look after
    the gardens and the houses; you must keep chaste. When you get
    into the bush to get wood, may not one of you lag behind. When
    you go to the gardens to do work keep together. Return together
    with your younger sisters."


He also admonishes the people from the other villages to keep away,
never to visit Sinaketa at night or in the evening, and never to come
singly into the village. On hearing that, the headman of an inland
village will get up and speak in this fashion:


    "Not thus, oh, our chief; you go away, and your village will remain
    here as it is. Look, when you are here we come to see you. You
    sail away, we shall keep to our villages. When you return, we
    come again. Perhaps you will give us some betel-nut, some sago,
    some coco-nuts. Perhaps you will kula to us some necklace of
    shell beads."


After these harangues are over, the canoes sail away in a body. Some
of the women on the beach may weep at the actual departure, but it
is taboo to weep afterwards. The woman are also supposed to keep
the taboo, that is, not to walk alone out of the village, not to
receive male visitors, in fact, to remain chaste and true to their
husbands during their absence. Should a woman commit misconduct,
her husband's canoe would be slow. As a rule there are recriminations
between husbands and wives and consequent bad feeling on the return
of the party; whether the canoe should be blamed or the wife it is
difficult to say.

The women now look out for the rain and thunder, for the sign that
the men have opened the lilava (special magical bundle). Then they
know that the party has arrived on the beach of Sarubwoyna, and
performs now its final magic, and prepares for its entrance into the
villages of Tu'utauna, and Bwayowa. The women are very anxious that
the men should succeed in arriving at Dobu, and that they should not
be compelled by bad weather to return from the Amphletts. They have
been preparing special grass skirts to put on, when they meet the
returning canoes on the beach; they also hope to receive the sago,
which is considered a dainty, and some of the ornaments, which their
men bring them back from Dobu. If for any reason the fleet returns
prematurely, there is great disappointment throughout the village,
because this means the expedition has been a failure, nothing has been
brought back to those left at home, and they have no opportunity of
wearing their ceremonial dress.