THE NATIVES OF THE TROBRIAND ISLANDS
I
Leaving the bronzed rocks and the dark jungle of the Amphletts for
the present--for we shall have to revisit them in the course of our
study, and then shall learn more about their inhabitants--we sail
North into an entirely different world of flat coral islands; into
an ethnographic district, which stands out by ever so many peculiar
manners and customs from the rest of Papuo-Melanesia. So far, we have
sailed over intensely blue, clear seas, where in shallow places the
coral bottom, with its variety of colour and form, with its wonderful
plant and fish life, is a fascinating spectacle in itself--a sea
framed in all the splendours of tropical jungle, of volcanic and
mountainous scenery, with lively watercourses and falls, with steamy
clouds trailing in the high valleys. From all this we take a final
farewell as we sail North. The outlines of the Amphletts soon fade
away in tropical haze, till only Koyatabu's slender pyramid, lifted
over them, remains on the horizon, the graceful form, which follows
us even as far as the Lagoon of Kiriwina.
We now enter an opaque, greenish sea, whose monotony is broken only
by a few sandbanks, some bare and awash, others with a few pandanus
trees squatting on their air roots, high in the sand. To these banks,
the Amphlett natives come and there they spend weeks on end, fishing
for turtle and dugong. Here is also laid the scene of several of
the mythical incidents of primeval Kula. Further ahead, through the
misty spray, the line of horizon thickens here and there, as if faint
pencil marks had been drawn upon it. These become more substantial,
one of them lengthens and broadens, the others spring into the distinct
shapes of small islands, and we find ourselves in the big Lagoon of
the Trobriands, with Boyowa, the largest island, on our right, and with
many others, inhabited and uninhabited, to the North and North-West.
As we sail in the Lagoon, following the intricate passages between
the shallows, and as we approach the main island, the thick, tangled
matting of the low jungle breaks here and there over a beach, and we
can see into a palm grove, like an interior, supported by pillars. This
indicates the site of a village. We step ashore on to the sea front,
as a rule covered with mud and refuse, with canoes drawn up high
and dry, and passing through the grove, we enter the village itself
(see Plate VIII).
Soon we are seated on one of the platforms built in front of a
yam-house, shaded by its overhanging roof. The round, grey logs, worn
smooth by contact with naked feet and bodies; the trodden ground of
the village-street; the brown skins of the natives, who immediately
surround the visitor in large groups--all these form a colour scheme
of bronze and grey, unforgettable to anyone, who, like myself, has
lived among these people.
It is difficult to convey the feelings of intense interest and suspense
with which an Ethnographer enters for the first time the district that
is to be the future scene of his field-work. Certain salient features,
characteristic of the place, at once rivet his attention, and fill
him with hopes or apprehensions. The appearance of the natives,
their manners, their types of behaviour, may augur well or ill for
the possibilities of rapid and easy research. One is on the lookout
for symptoms of deeper, sociological facts, one suspects many hidden
and mysterious ethnographic phenomena behind the commonplace aspect of
things. Perhaps that queer-looking, intelligent native is a renowned
sorcerer; perhaps between those two groups of men there exists some
important rivalry or vendetta which may throw much light on the
customs and character of the people if one can only lay hands upon
it? Such at least were my thoughts and feelings as on the day of my
arrival in Boyowa I sat scanning a chatting group of Trobriand natives.
The great variety in their physical appearance is what strikes one
first in Boyowa. [] There are men and women of tall stature, fine
bearing, and delicate features, with clear-cut aquiline profile and
high foreheads, well formed nose and chin, and an open, intelligent
expression (see Plates IX, XV, XVII). And besides these, there are
others with prognathic, negroid faces, broad, thick-lipped mouths,
narrow foreheads, and a coarse expression (see Plates X, XI, XII). The
better featured have also a markedly lighter skin. Even their hair
differs, varying from quite straight locks to the frizzly mop of the
typical Melanesian. They wear the same classes of ornaments as the
other Massim, consisting mainly of fibre armlets and belts, earrings
of turtle shell and spondylus discs, and they are very fond of using,
for personal decoration, flowers and aromatic herbs. In manner they
are much freer, more familiar and confident, than any of the natives
we have so far met. As soon as an interesting stranger arrives, half
the village assembles around him, talking loudly and making remarks
about him, frequently uncomplimentary, and altogether assuming a tone
of jocular familiarity.
One of the main sociological features at once strikes an observant
newcomer--the existence of rank and social differentiation. Some of
the natives--very frequently those of the finer looking type--are
treated with most marked deference by others, and in return, these
chiefs and persons of rank behave in quite a different way towards the
strangers. In fact, they show excellent manners in the full meaning
of this word.
When a chief is present, no commoner dares to remain in a physically
higher position; he has to bend his body or squat. Similarly, when
the chief sits down, no one would dare to stand. The institution
of definite chieftainship, to which are shown such extreme marks of
deference, with a sort of rudimentary Court ceremonial, with insignia
of rank and authority, is so entirely foreign to the whole spirit
of Melanesian tribal life, that at first sight it transports the
Ethnographer into a different world. In the course of our inquiry,
we shall constantly meet with manifestation of the Kiriwinian chief's
authority, we shall notice the difference in this respect between the
Trobrianders and the other tribes, and the resulting adjustments of
tribal usage.
II
Another sociological feature, which forcibly obtrudes itself on the
visitor's notice is the social position of the women. Their behaviour,
after the cool aloofness of the Dobuan women, and the very uninviting
treatment which strangers receive from those of the Amphletts, comes
almost as a shock in its friendly familiarity. Naturally, here also,
the manners of women of rank are quite different from those of low
class commoners. But, on the whole, high and low alike, though by
no means reserved, have a genial, pleasant approach, and many of
them are very fine-looking (see Plates XI, XII). Their dress is also
different from any so far observed. All the Melanesian women in New
Guinea wear a petticoat made of fibre. Among the Southern Massim,
this fibre skirt is long, reaching to the knees or below, whereas in
the Trobriands it is much shorter and fuller, consisting of several
layers standing out round the body like a ruff (compare the S. Massim
women on Plates V and VI with the Trobrianders on Plate IV). The
highly ornamental effect of that dress is enhanced by the elaborate
decorations made in three colours on the several layers forming the
top skirt. On the whole, it is very becoming to fine young women,
and gives to small slender girls a graceful, elfish appearance.
Chastity is an unknown virtue among these natives. At an incredibly
early age they become initiated into sexual life, and many of the
innocent looking plays of childhood are not as innocuous as they
appear. As they grow up, they live in promiscuous free-love, which
gradually develops into more permanent attachments, one of which ends
in marriage. But before this is reached, unmarried girls are openly
supposed to be quite free to do what they like, and there are even
ceremonial arrangements by which the girls of a village repair in
a body to another place; there they publicly range themselves for
inspection, and each is chosen by a local boy, with whom she spends
a night. This is called katuyausi (see Plate XII). Again, when a
visiting party arrives from another district, food is brought to them
by the unmarried girls, who are also expected to satisfy their sexual
wants. At the big mortuary vigils round the corpse of a newly deceased
person, people from neighbouring villages come in large bodies to take
part in the wailing and singing. The girls of the visiting party are
expected by usage to comfort the boys of the bereaved village, in a
manner which gives much anguish to their official lovers. There is
another remarkable form of ceremonial licence, in which indeed women
are openly the initiators. During the gardening season, at the time of
weeding, the women do communal work, and any strange man who ventures
to pass through the district runs a considerable risk, for the women
will run after him, seize him, tear off his pubic leaf, and ill-treat
him orgiastically in the most ignominious manner. Side by side with
these ceremonial forms of licence, there go, in the normal course of
events, constant private intrigues, more intense during the festive
seasons, becoming less prominent as garden work, trading expeditions,
or harvesting take up the energies and attention of the tribe.
Marriage is associated with hardly any public or private rite or
ceremony. The woman simply joins her husband in his house, and later
on, there is a series of exchanges of gifts, which in no way can
be interpreted as purchase money for the wife. As a matter of fact,
the most important feature of the Trobriand marriage is the fact that
the wife's family have to contribute, and that in a very substantial
manner, to the economics of her household, and also they have to
perform all sorts of services for the husband. In her married life,
the woman is supposed to remain faithful to her husband, but this
rule is neither very strictly kept nor enforced. In all other ways,
she retains a great measure of independence, and her husband has to
treat her well and with consideration. If he does not, the woman simply
leaves him and returns to her family, and as the husband is as a rule
economically the loser by her action, he has to exert himself to get
her back--which he does by means of presents and persuasions. If she
chooses, she can leave him for good, and she can always find someone
else to marry.
In tribal life, the position of women is also very high. They do not as
a rule join the councils of men, but in many matters they have their
own way, and control several aspects of tribal life. Thus, some of
the garden work is their business; and this is considered a privilege
as well as a duty. They also look after certain stages in the big,
ceremonial divisions of food, associated with the very complete and
elaborate mortuary ritual of the Boyowans (see Plate IV). Certain
forms of magic--that performed over a first-born baby, beauty-magic
made at tribal ceremonies, some classes of sorcery--are also the
monopoly of women. Women of rank share the privileges incidental to
it, and men of low caste will bend before them and observe all the
necessary formalities and taboos due to a chief. A woman of chief's
rank, married to commoner, retains her status, even with regard to
her husband, and has to be treated accordingly.
The Trobrianders are matrilineal, that is, in tracing descent and
settling inheritance, they follow the maternal line. A child belongs
to the clan and village community of its mother, and wealth, as well
as social position, are inherited, not from father to son, but from
maternal uncle to nephew. This rule admits of certain important and
interesting exceptions, which we shall come across in the course of
this study.
III
Returning to our imaginary first visit ashore, the next interesting
thing to do, after we have sufficiently taken in the appearance and
manners of the natives, is to walk round the village. In doing this,
again we would come across much, which to a trained eye, would reveal
at once deeper sociological facts. In the Trobriands, however, it
would be better to make our first observations in one of the large,
inland villages, situated on even, flat ground with plenty of space,
so that it has been possible to build it in the typical pattern. In
the coastal villages, placed on marshy ground and coral outcrop,
the irregularity of the soil and cramped space have obliterated the
design, and they present quite a chaotic appearance. The big villages
of the central districts, on the other hands, are built one and all
with an almost geometrical regularity.
In the middle, a big circular space is surrounded by a ring of yam
houses. These latter are built on piles, and present a fine, decorative
front, with walls of big, round logs, laid crosswise on one another,
so as to leave wide interstices through which the stored yams can be
seen (see Plates XV, XXXII, XXXIII). Some of the store-houses strike
us at once as being better built, larger, and higher than the rest,
and these have also big, ornamented boards, running round the gable
and across it. These are the yam houses of the chief or of persons
of rank. Each yam house also has, as a rule, a small platform in
front of it, on which groups of men will sit and chat in the evening,
and where visitors can rest.
Concentrically with the circular row of yam houses, there runs a ring
of dwelling huts, and thus a street going all round the village is
formed between the two rows (see Plates III, IV, VIII). The dwellings
are lower than the yam houses, and instead of being on piles, are
built directly on the ground. The interior is dark and very stuffy,
and the only opening into it is through the door, and that is usually
closed. Each hut is occupied by one family (see Plate XV), that is,
husband, wife and small children, while adolescent and grown-up boys
and girls live in separate small bachelor's houses, harbouring some
two to six inmates. Chiefs and people of rank have their special,
personal houses, besides those of their wives. The Chief's house often
stands in the central ring of the store-houses facing the main place.
The broad inspection of the village would therefore reveal to
us the rôle of decoration as insignia of rank, the existence of
bachelors' and spinsters' houses, the great importance attached to
the yam-harvest--all these small symptoms which, followed up, would
lead us deep into the problems of native sociology. Moreover, such
an inspection would have led us to inquire as to the part played by
the different divisions of the village in tribal life. We should then
learn that the baku, the central circular space, is the scene of public
ceremonies and festivities, such as dancing (see Plates XIII, XIV),
division of food, tribal feasts, mortuary vigils, in short, of all
doings that represent the village as a whole. In the circular street
between the stores and living houses, everyday life goes on, that is,
the preparation of food, the eating of meals, and the usual exchange
of gossip and ordinary social amenities. The interior of the houses
is only used at night, or on wet days, and is more a sleeping than
a living room. The backs of the houses and the contiguous groves are
the scene of the children's play and the women's occupations. Further
away, remote parts of the grove are reserved for sanitary purposes,
each sex having its own retreat.
The baku (central place) is the most picturesque part, and there the
somewhat monotonous colour scheme of the brown and grey is broken by
the overhanging foliage of the grove, seen above the neat fronts and
gaudy ornamentation of the yam-houses and by the decorations worn by
the crowd when a dance or ceremony is taking place (see Plates XIII,
XXXIII). Dancing is done only at one time in the year, in connection
with the harvest festivities, called milamala, at which season also
the spirits of the dead return from Tuma, the nether-world, to the
villages from which they hail. Sometimes the dancing season lasts only
for a few weeks or even days, sometimes it is extended into a special
dancing period called usigola. During such a time of festivities,
the inhabitants of a village will dance day after day, for a month
or longer, the period being inaugurated by a feast, punctuated by
several more, and ending in a big culminating performance. At this
many villages assist as spectators, and distributions of food take
place. During an usigola, dancing is done in full dress, that is,
with facial painting, floral decorations, valuable ornaments, and
a head-dress of white cockatoo feathers (see Plates XIII, XIV). A
performance consists always of a dance executed in a ring to the
accompaniment of singing and drum-beating, both of which are done by
a group of people standing in the middle. Some dances are done with
the carved dancing shield.
Sociologically, the village is an important unit in the
Trobriands. Even the mightiest chief in the Trobriands wields his
authority primarily over his own village and only secondarily over the
district. The village community exploit jointly their garden lands,
perform ceremonies, wage warfare, undertake trading expeditions,
and sail in the same canoe or fleet of canoes as one group.
After the first inspection of the village, we would be naturally
interested to know more of the surrounding country, and would take a
walk through the bush. Here, however, if we hoped for a picturesque
and varied landscape, we should receive a great disappointment. The
extensive, flat island consists only of one fertile plain, with a
low coral ridge running along portions of the coast. It is almost
entirely under intermittent cultivation, and the bush, regularly
cleared away every few years, has no time to grow high. A low, dense
jungle grows in a matted tangle, and practically wherever we move
on the island we walk along between two green walls, presenting no
variety, allowing of no broader view. The monotony is broken only
by an occasional clump of old trees left standing--usually a tabooed
place--or by one of the numerous villages which we meet with every mile
or two in this densely populated country. The main element, both of
picturesqueness and ethnographic interest, is afforded by the native
gardens. Each year about one quarter or one fifth of the total area
is under actual cultivation as gardens, and these are well tended,
and present a pleasant change from the monotony of the scrub. In
its early stages, the garden site is simply a bare, cleared space,
allowing of a Wider outlook upon the distant coral ridge in the East,
and upon the tall groves, scattered over the horizon, which indicate
villages or tabooed tree clumps. Later on, when the yam-vines, taro,
and sugar cane begin to grow and bud, the bare brown soil is covered
with the fresh green of the tender plants. After some more time still,
tall, stout poles are planted over each yam-plant; the vine climbs
round them, grows into a full, shady garland of foliage, and the
whole makes the impression of a large, exuberant hop-yard.
IV
Half of the natives' working life is spent in the garden, and around
it centres perhaps more than half of his interests and ambitions. And
here we must pause and make an attempt to understand his attitude
in this matter, as it is typical of the way in which he goes about
all his work. If we remain under the delusion that the native is a
happy-go-lucky, lazy child of nature, who shuns as far as possible
all labour and effort, waiting till the ripe fruits, so bountifully
supplied by generous tropical Nature, fall into his mouth, we shall not
be able to understand in the least his aims and motives in carrying
out the Kula or any other enterprise. On the contrary, the truth is
that the native can and, under circumstances, does work hard, and
work systematically, with endurance and purpose, nor does he wait
till he is pressed to work by his immediate needs.
In gardening, for instance, the natives produce much more than they
actually require, and in any average year they harvest perhaps twice as
much as they can eat. Nowadays, this surplus is exported by Europeans
to feed plantation hands in other parts of New Guinea; in olden days
it was simply allowed to rot. Again, they produce this surplus in a
manner which entails much more work than is strictly necessary for
obtaining the crops. Much time and labour is given up to æsthetic
purposes, to making the gardens tidy, clean, cleared of all debris;
to building fine, solid fences, to providing specially strong and big
yam-poles. All these things are to some extent required for the growth
of the plant; but there can be no doubt that the natives push their
conscientiousness far beyond the limit of the purely necessary. The
non-utilitarian element in their garden work is still more clearly
perceptible in the various tasks which they carry out entirely for
the sake of ornamentation, in connection with magical ceremonies,
and in obedience to tribal usage. Thus, after the ground has been
scrupulously cleared and is ready for planting, the natives divide
each garden plot into small squares, each a few yards in length and
width, and this is done only in obedience to usage, in order to make
the gardens look neat. No self-respecting man would dream of omitting
to do this. Again, in especially well trimmed gardens, long horizontal
poles are tied to the yam supports in order to embellish them. Another,
and perhaps the most interesting example of non-utilitarian work
is afforded by the big, prismatic erections called kamkokola, which
serve ornamental and magical purposes, but have nothing to do with
the growth of plants (comp. Plate LIX).
Among the forces and beliefs which bear upon and regulate garden work,
perhaps magic is the most important. It is a department of its own,
and the garden magician, next to the chief and the sorcerer, is the
most important personage of the village. The position is hereditary,
and, in each village, a special system of magic is handed on in the
female line from one generation to another. I have called it a system,
because the magician has to perform a series of rites and spells over
the garden, which run parallel with the labour, and which, in fact,
initiate each stage of the work and each new development of the plant
life. Even before any gardening is begun at all, the magician has to
consecrate the site with a big ceremonial performance in which all
the men of the village take part. This ceremony officially opens the
season's gardening, and only after it is performed do the villagers
begin to cut the scrub on their plots. Then, in a series of rites,
the magician inaugurates successively all the various stages which
follow one another--the burning of the scrub, the clearing, the
planting, the weeding and the harvesting. Also, in another series
of rites and spells, he magically assists the plant in sprouting,
in budding, in bursting into leaf, in climbing, in forming the rich
garlands of foliage, and in producing the edible tubers.
The garden magician, according to native ideas, thus controls both
the work of man and the forces of Nature. He also acts directly
as supervisor of gardening, sees to it that people do not skimp
their work, or lag behind with it. Thus magic is a systematising,
regulating, and controlling influence in garden work. The magician,
in carrying out the rites, sets the pace, compels people to apply
themselves to certain tasks, and to accomplish them properly and
in time. Incidentally, magic also imposes on the tribe a good deal
of extra work, of apparently unnecessary, hampering taboos and
regulations. In the long run, however, there is no doubt that by its
influence in ordering, systematising and regulating work, magic is
economically invaluable for the natives. []
Another notion which must be exploded, once and for ever, is that of
the Primitive Economic Man of some current economic text books. This
fanciful, dummy creature, who has been very tenacious of existence
in popular and semi-popular economic literature, and whose shadow
haunts even the minds of competent anthropologists, blighting their
outlook with a preconceived idea, is an imaginary, primitive man,
or savage, prompted in all his actions by a rationalistic conception
of self-interest, and achieving his aims directly and with the
minimum of effort. Even one well established instance should show
how preposterous is this assumption that man, and especially man on
a low level of culture, should be actuated by pure economic motives
of enlightened self-interest. The primitive Trobriander furnishes
us with such an instance, contradicting this fallacious theory. He
works prompted by motives of a highly complex, social and traditional
nature, and towards aims which are certainly not directed towards
the satisfaction of present wants, or to the direct achievement of
utilitarian purposes. Thus, in the first place, as we have seen,
work is not carried out on the principle of the least effort. On
the contrary, much time and energy is spent on wholly unnecessary
effort, that is, from a utilitarian point of view. Again, work and
effort, instead of being merely a means to an end, are, in a way an
end in themselves. A good garden worker in the Trobriands derives
a direct prestige from the amount of labour he can do, and the size
of garden he can till. The title tokwaybagula, which means "good" or
"efficient gardener," is bestowed with discrimination, and borne with
pride. Several of my friends, renowned as tokwaybagula, would boast to
me how long they worked, how much ground they tilled, and would compare
their efforts with those of less efficient men. When the labour, some
of which is done communally, is being actually carried out, a good
deal of competition goes on. Men vie with one another in their speed,
in their thoroughness, and in the weights they can lift, when bringing
big poles to the garden, or in carrying away the harvested yams.
The most important point about this is, however, that all, or almost
all the fruits of his work, and certainly any surplus which he can
achieve by extra effort, goes not to the man himself, but to his
relatives-in-law. Without entering into details of the system of
the apportionment of the harvest, of which the sociology is rather
complex and would require a preliminary account of the Trobriand
kinship system and kinship ideas, it may be said that about three
quarters of a man's crops go partly as tribute to the chief, partly
as his due to his sister's (or mother's) husband and family.
But although he thus derives practically no personal benefit in
the utilitarian sense from his harvest, the gardener receives much
praise and renown from its size and quality, and that in a direct
and circumstantial manner. For all the crops, after being harvested,
are displayed for some time afterwards in the gardens, piled up in
neat, conical heaps under small shelters made of yam vine. Each man's
harvest is thus exhibited for criticism in his own plot, and parties
of natives walk about from garden to garden, admiring, comparing and
praising the best results. The importance of the food display can be
gauged by the fact that, in olden days, when the chief's power was
much more considerable than now, it was dangerous for a man who was
not either of high rank himself, or working for such a one, to show
crops which might compare too favourably with those of the chief.
In years when the harvest promises to be plentiful, the chief will
proclaim a kayasa harvest, that is to say, ceremonial, competitive
display of food, and then the straining for good results and the
interest taken in them are still higher. We shall meet later on with
ceremonial enterprises of the kayasa type, and find that they play a
considerable part in the Kula. All this shows how entirely the real
native of flesh and bone differs from the shadowy Primitive Economic
Man, on whose imaginary behaviour many of the scholastic deductions
of abstract economics are based. [] The Trobriander works in a
roundabout way, to a large extent for the sake of the work itself,
and puts a great deal of æsthetic polish on the arrangement and
general appearance of his garden. He is not guided primarily by the
desire to satisfy his wants, but by a very complex set of traditional
forces, duties and obligations, beliefs in magic, social ambitions
and vanities. He wants, if he is a man, to achieve social distinction
as a good gardener and a good worker in general.
I have dwelt at this length upon these points concerning the motives
and aims of the Trobrianders in their garden work, because, in the
chapters that follow, we shall be studying economic activities, and
the reader will grasp the attitude of the natives best if he has it
illustrated to him by various examples. All that has been said in this
matter about the Trobrianders applies also to the neighbouring tribes.
V
With the help of this new insight gained into the mind of the native,
and into their social scheme of harvest distribution, it will be
easier to describe the nature of the chief's authority. Chieftainship
in the Trobriands is the combination of two institutions: first,
that of headmanship, or village authority; secondly, that of totemic
clanship, that is the division of the community into classes or castes,
each with a certain more or less definite rank.
In every community in the Trobriands, there is one man who wields the
greatest authority, though often this does not amount to very much. He
is, in many cases, nothing more than the Primus inter pares in a group
of village elders, who deliberate on all important matters together,
and arrive at a decision by common consent. It must not be forgotten
that there is hardly ever much room for doubt or deliberation,
as natives communally, as well as individually, never act except on
traditional and conventional lines. This village headman is, as a rule,
therefore, not much more than a master of tribal ceremonies, and the
main speaker within and without the tribe, whenever one is needed.
But the position of headman becomes much more than this, when he
is a person of high rank, which is by no means always the case. In
the Trobriands there exist four totemic clans, and each of these
is divided into a number of smaller sub-clans,--which could also
be called families or castes, for the members of each claim common
descent from one ancestress, and each of them holds a certain,
specified rank. These sub-clans have also a local character, because
the original ancestress emerged from a hole in the ground, as a rule
somewhere in the neighbourhood of their village community. There is
not one sub-clan in the Trobriands whose members cannot indicate its
original locality, where their group, in the form of the ancestress,
first saw the light of the sun. Coral outcrops, water-holes, small
caves or grottoes, are generally pointed out as the original "holes"
or "houses," as they are called. Often such a hole is surrounded by
one of the tabooed clumps of trees alluded to before. Many of them
are situated in the groves surrounding a village, and a few near the
sea shore. Not one is on the cultivable land.
The highest sub-clan is that of the Tabalu, belonging to the Malasi
totem clan. To this sub-clan belongs the main chief of Kiriwina,
To'uluwa, who resides in the village of Omarakana (see Plate II and
Frontispiece). He is in the first place the headman of his own village,
and in contrast to the headmen of low rank, he has quite a considerable
amount of power. His high rank inspires everyone about him with the
greatest and most genuine respect and awe, and the remnants of his
power are still surprisingly large, even now, when white authorities,
very foolishly and with fatal results, do their utmost to undermine
his prestige and influence.
Not only does the chief--by which word I shall designate a headman
of rank--possess a high degree of authority within his own village,
but his sphere of influence extends far beyond it. A number of
villages are tributary to him, and in several respects subject to
his authority. In case of war, they are his allies, and have to
foregather in his village. When he needs men to perform some task,
he can send to his subject villages, and they will supply him with
workers. In all big festivities the villages of his district will
join, and the chief will act as master of ceremonies. Nevertheless,
for all these services rendered to him he has to pay. He even has to
pay for any tributes received out of his stores of wealth. Wealth,
in the Trobriands, is the outward sign and the substance of power,
and the means also of exercising it. But how does he acquire his
wealth? And here we come to the main duty of the vassal villages to
the chief. From each subject village, he takes a wife, whose family,
according to the Trobriand law, has to supply him with large amounts of
crops. This wife is always the sister or some relation of the headman
of the subject village, and thus practically the whole community has
to work for him. In olden days, the chief of Omarakana had up to as
many as forty consorts, and received perhaps as much as thirty to
fifty per cent. of all the garden produce of Kiriwina. Even now,
when his wives number only sixteen, he has enormous storehouses,
and they are full to the roof with yams every harvest time.
With this supply, he is able to pay for the many services he
requires, to furnish with food the participants in big feasts,
in tribal gatherings or distant expeditions. Part of the food he
uses to acquire objects of native wealth, or to pay for the making
of them. In brief, through his privilege of practising polygamy, the
chief is kept supplied with an abundance of wealth in food stuffs and
in valuables, which he uses to maintain his high position; to organise
tribal festivities and enterprises, and to pay, according to custom,
for the many personal services to which he is entitled.
One point in connection with the chief's authority deserves special
mention. Power implies not only the possibility of rewarding, but
also the means of punishing. This in the Trobriands is as a rule done
indirectly, by means of sorcery. The chief has the best sorcerers
of the district always at his beck and call. Of course he also has
to reward them when they do him a service. If anyone offends him,
or trespasses upon his authority, the chief summons the sorcerer, and
orders that the culprit shall die by black magic. And here the chief
is powerfully helped in achieving his end by the fact that he can do
this openly, so that everybody, and the victim himself knows that a
sorcerer is after him. As the natives are very deeply and genuinely
afraid of sorcery, the feeling of being hunted, of imagining themselves
doomed, is in itself enough to doom them in reality. Only in extreme
cases, does a chief inflict direct punishment on a culprit. He has
one or two hereditary henchmen, whose duty it is to kill the man who
has so deeply offended him, that actual death is the only sufficient
punishment. As a matter of fact, very few cases of this are on record,
and it is now, of course, entirely in abeyance.
Thus the chief's position can be grasped only through the realisation
of the high importance of wealth, of the necessity of paying for
everything, even for services which are due to him, and which could
not be withheld. Again, this wealth comes to the chief from his
relations-in-law, and it is through his right to practise polygamy
that he actually achieves his position, and exercises his power.
Side by side with this rather complex mechanism of authority, the
prestige of rank, the direct recognition of his personal superiority,
give the chief an immense power, even outside his district. Except
for the few of his own rank, no native in the Trobriands will remain
erect when the great chief of Omarakana approaches, even in these
days of tribal disintegration. Wherever he goes, he is considered
as the most important person, is seated on a high platform, and
treated with consideration. Of course the fact that he is accorded
marks of great deference, and approached in the manner as if he were
a supreme despot, does not mean that perfect good fellowship and
sociability do not reign in his personal relations with his companions
and vassals. There is no difference in interests or outlook between
him and his subjects. They sit together and chat, they exchange
village gossip, the only difference being that the chief is always
on his guard, and much more reticent and diplomatic than the other,
though he is no less interested. The chief, unless he is too old,
joins in dances and even in games, and indeed he takes precedence as
a matter of course.
In trying to realise the social conditions among the Trobrianders
and their neighbours, it must not be forgotten that their social
organisation is in certain respects complex and ill-defined. Besides
very definite laws which are strictly obeyed, there exist a number
of quaint usages, of vague graduations in rules, of others where the
exceptions are so many, that they rather obliterate the rule than
confirm it. The narrow social outlook of the native who does not
see beyond his own district, the prevalence of singularities and
exceptional cases is one of the leading characteristics of native
sociology, one which for many reasons has not been sufficiently
recognised. But the main outlines of chieftainship here presented,
will be enough to give a clear idea of it and of some of the flavour
of their institutions, as much, in fact, as is necessary, in order
to understand the chief's rôle in the Kula. But it must to a certain
extent be supplemented by the concrete data, bearing upon the political
divisions of the Trobriands.
The most important chief is, as said, the one who resides in Omarakana
and rules Kiriwina, agriculturally the richest and most important
district. His family, or sub-clan, the Tabalu, are acknowledged to
have by far the highest rank in all the Archipelago. Their fame is
spread over the whole Kula district; the entire province of Kiriwina
derives prestige from its chief, and its inhabitants also keep all
his personal taboos, which is a duty but also a distinction. Next to
the high chief, there resides in a village some two miles distant,
a personage who, though in several respects his vassal, is also his
main foe and rival, the headman of Kabwaku, and ruler of the province
of Tilataula. The present holder of this title is an old rogue named
Moliasi. From time to time, in the old days, war used to break out
between the two provinces, each of which could muster some twelve
villages for the fight. These wars were never very bloody or of
long duration, and they were in many ways fought in a competitive,
sporting manner, since, unlike with the Dobuans and Southern Massim,
there were neither head-hunting nor cannibalistic practices among
the Boyowans. Nevertheless, defeat was a serious matter. It meant
a temporary destruction of the loser's villages, and exile for a
year or two. After that, a ceremony of reconciliation took place,
and friend and foe would help to rebuild the villages. [] The ruler
of Tilataula has an intermediate rank, and outside his district he
does not enjoy much prestige; but within it, he has a considerable
amount of power, and a good deal of wealth, in the shape of stored
food and ceremonial articles. All the villages under his rule, have,
of course, their own independent headman, who, being of low rank,
have only a small degree of local authority.
In the West of the big, Northern half of Boyowa (that is of the main
island of the Trobriand Group) are again two districts, in past
times often at war with one another. One of them, Kuboma, subject
to the chief of Gumilababa, of high rank, though inferior to the
chief of Kiriwina, consists of some ten inland villages, and is very
important as a centre of industry. Among these villages are included
those of Yalaka, Buduwaylaka, Kudukwaykela, where the quicklime is
prepared for betel chewing, and also the lime pots made. The highly
artistic designs, burnt in on the lime pots, are the speciality of
these villagers, but unfortunately the industry is fast decaying. The
inhabitants of Luya are renowned for their basket work, of which the
finest specimens are their production. But the most remarkable of all
is the village of Bwoytalu, whose inhabitants are at the same time
the most despised pariahs, the most dreaded sorcerers, and the most
skilful and industrious craftsmen in the island. They belong to several
sub-clans, all originating in the neighbourhood of the village, near
which also, according to tradition, the original sorcerer came out of
the soil in the form of a crab. They eat the flesh of bush-pigs, and
they catch and eat the stingaree, both objects of strict taboos and of
genuine loathing to the other inhabitants of Northern Boyowa. For this
reason they are despised and regarded as unclean by the others. In
olden days they would have to crouch lower and more abjectly than
anyone else. No man or woman would mate with anyone from Bwoytalu,
whether in marriage or in an intrigue. Yet in wood carving, and
especially in the working out of the wonderful, round dishes, in the
manufacture of plaited fibre work, and in the production of combs, they
are far more skilful than anyone else, and acknowledged to be such;
they are the wholesale manufacturers of these objects for export,
and they can produce work not to be rivalled by any other village.
The five villages lying on the western coast of the northern half,
on the shores of the Lagoon, form the district of Kulumata. They are
all fishing villages, but differ in their methods, and each has its
own fishing grounds and its own methods of exploiting them. []
The district is much less homogeneous than any of those before
mentioned. It possesses no paramount chief, and even in war the
villagers used not to fight on the same side. But it is impossible
to enter here into all these shades and singularities of political
organisation.
In the southern part of Boyowa, there is first the province of Luba,
occupying the waist of the island, the part where it narrows down
to a long isthmus. This part is ruled by a chief of high rank, who
resides in Olivilevi. He belongs to the same family as the chief of
Omarakana, and this southern dominion is the result of a younger line's
having branched off some three generations ago. This happened after an
unsuccessful war, when the whole tribe of Kiriwina fled south to Luba,
and lived there for two years in a temporary village. The main body
returned afterwards, but a number remained behind with the chief's
brother, and thus the village of Olivilevi was founded. Wawela,
which was formerly a very big village, now consists of hardly more
than twenty huts. The only one on the Eastern shore which lies
right on the sea, it is very picturesquely situated, overlooking a
wide bay with a clean beach. It is of importance as the traditional
centre of astronomical knowledge. From here, for generation after
generation up to the present day, the calendar of the natives has
been regulated. This means that some of the most important dates are
fixed, especially that of the great annual festival, the Milamala,
always held at full moon. Again, Wawela is one of the villages where
the second form of sorcery, that of the flying witches, has its main
Trobriand home. In fact, according to native belief, this form of
sorcery has its seat only in the Southern half, and is unknown to the
women in the North, though the Southern witches extend their field
of operations all over Boyowa. Wawela, which lies facing the East,
and which is always in close touch with the villages of Kitava and
the rest of the Marshall Bennetts, shares with these islands the
reputation of harbouring many women who can fly, kill by magic, who
also feed on corpses, and are especially dangerous to seamen in peril.
Further down to the South, on the Western shore of the Lagoon, we come
to the big settlement of Sinaketa, consisting of some six villages
lying within a few hundred yards from one another, but each having
its own headman and a certain amount of local characteristics. These
villages form, however, one community for purposes of war and of
the Kula. Some of the local headmen of Sinaketa claim the highest
rank, some are commoners; but on the whole, both the principle of
rank and the power of the chief break down more and more as we move
South. Beyond Sinaketa, we meet a few more villages, who practice a
local Kula, and with whom we shall have to deal later on. Sinaketa
itself will loom very largely in the descriptions that follow. The
Southern part of the island is sometimes called Kaybwagina, but it does
not constitute a definite political unit, like the Northern districts.
Finally, south of the main island, divided from it by a narrow channel,
lies the half-moon-shaped island of Vakuta, to which belong four small
villages and one big one. Within recent times, perhaps four to six
generations ago, there came down and settled in this last mentioned one
a branch of the real Tabalu, the chiefly family of highest rank. But
their power here never assumed the proportions even of the small
chiefs of Sinaketa. In Vakuta, the typical Papuo-Melanesian system of
government by tribal elders--with one more prominent than the others,
but not paramount--is in full vigour.
The two big settlements of Sinaketa and Vakuta play a great part
in the Kula, and they also are the only two communities in the
whole Trobriands where the red shell discs are made. This industry,
as we shall see, is closely associated with the Kula. Politically,
Sinaketa and Vakuta are rivals, and in olden days were periodically
at war with one another.
Another district which forms a definite political and cultural unit
is the large island of Kayleula, in the West. The inhabitants are
fishermen, canoe-builders, and traders, and undertake big expeditions
to the western d'Entrecasteaux islands, trading for betel-nut, sago,
pottery and turtle shell in exchange for their own industrial produce.
It has been necessary to give a somewhat detailed description of
chieftainship and political divisions, as a firm grasp of the main,
political institutions is essential to the understanding of the
Kula. All departments of tribal life, religion, magic, economics
are interwoven, but the social organisation of the tribe lies at the
foundation of everything else. Thus it is essential to bear in mind
that the Trobriands form one cultural unit, speaking the same language,
having the same institutions, obeying the same laws and regulations,
swayed by the same beliefs and conventions. The districts just
enumerated, into which the Trobriands are sub-divided, are distinct
politically and not culturally; that is, each of them comprises the
same kind of natives, only obeying or at least acknowledging their
own chief, having their own interests and pursuits, and in case of
war each fighting their own fight.
Again, within each district, the several village communities have
each a great deal of independence. A village community is represented
by a headman, its members make their gardens in one block and under
the guidance of their own garden magician; they carry on their own
feasts and ceremonial arrangements, mourn their dead in common, and
perform, in remembrance of their departed ones, an endless series of
food distributions. In all big affairs, whether of the district or
of the tribe, members of a village community keep together, and act
in one group.
VI
Right across the political and local divisions cut the totemic clans,
each having a series of linked totems, with a bird as principal
one. [] The members of these four clans are scattered over the whole
tribe of Boyowa, and in each village community, members of all four are
to be found, and even in every house, there are at least two classes
represented, since a husband must be of a different clan from his wife
and children. There is a certain amount of solidarity within the clan,
based on the very vague feeling of communal affinity to the totem
birds and animals, but much more on the many social duties, such as
the performance of certain ceremonies, especially the mortuary ones,
which band the members of a clan together. But real solidarity obtains
only between members of a sub-clan. A sub-clan is a local division of
a clan, whose members claim common ancestry, and hence real identity
of bodily substance, and also are attached to the locality where
their ancestors emerged. It is to these sub-clans that the idea
of a definite rank attaches. One of the totemic clans, the Malasi,
includes the most aristocratic sub-clan, the Tabalu, as well as the
lowest one, the local division of the Malasi in Bwoytalu. A chief of
the Tabalu feels very insulted if it is ever hinted that he is akin
to one of the stingaree-eaters of the unclean village, although they
are Malasi like himself. The principle of rank attached to totemic
divisions is to be met only in Trobriand sociology; it is entirely
foreign to all the other Papuo-Melanesian tribes.
As regards kinship, the main thing to be remembered is that the natives
are matrilineal, and that the succession of rank, membership in all
the social groups, and the inheritance of possessions descend in the
maternal line. The mother's brother is considered the real guardian of
a boy, and there is a series of mutual duties and obligations, which
establish a very close and important relation between the two. The
real kinship, the real identity of substance is considered to exist
only between a man and his mother's relations. In the first rank of
these, his brothers and sisters are specially near to him. For his
sister or sisters he has to work as soon as they are grown up and
married. But, in spite of that, a most rigorous taboo exists between
them, beginning quite early in life. No man would joke and talk freely
in the presence of his sister, or even look at her. The slightest
allusion to the sexual affairs, whether illicit or matrimonial, of
a brother or sister in the presence of the other, is the deadliest
insult and mortification. When a man approaches a group of people
where his sister is talking, either she withdraws or he turns away.
The father's relation to his children is remarkable. Physiological
fatherhood [] is unknown, and no tie of kinship or relationship
is supposed to exist between father and child, except that between a
mother's husband and the wife's child. Nevertheless, the father is by
far the nearest and most affectionate friend of his children. In ever
so many cases, I could observe that when a child, a young boy or girl,
was in trouble or sick; when there was a question of some one exposing
himself to difficulties or danger for the child's sake, it was always
the father who worried, who would undergo all the hardships needed,
and never the maternal uncle. This state of things is quite clearly
recognised, and explicitly put into words by the natives. In matters
of inheritance and handing over of possessions, a man always shows
the tendency to do as much for his children as he is able, considering
his obligations to his sister's family.
It is difficult, in one phrase or two, to epitomise the distinction
between the two relations, that between a boy and his maternal uncle,
and that between a son and a father. The best way to put it shortly
might be by saying that the maternal uncle's position of close relation
is regarded as right by law and usage, whereas the father's interest
and affection for his children are due to sentiment, and to the
intimate personal relations existing between them. He has watched
the children grow up, he has assisted the mother in many of the
small and tender cares given to an infant, he has carried the child
about, and given it such education as it gets from watching the elder
ones at work, and gradually joining in. In matters of inheritance,
the father gives the children all that he can, and gives it freely
and with pleasure; the maternal uncle gives under the compulsion of
custom what he cannot withhold and keep for his own children.
VII
A few more words must be said about some of the magico-religious ideas
of the Trobrianders. The main thing that struck me in connection with
their belief in the spirits of the dead, was that they are almost
completely devoid of any fear of ghosts, of any of these uncanny
feelings with which we face the idea of a possible return of the
dead. All the fears and dreads of the natives are reserved for black
magic, flying witches, malevolent disease-bringing beings, but above
all for sorcerers and witches. The spirits migrate immediately after
death to the island of Tuma, lying in the North-West of Boyowa, and
there they exist for another span of time, underground, say some, on
the surface of the earth, though invisible, say others. They return
to visit their own villages once a year, and take part in the big
annual feast, milamala, where they receive offerings. Sometimes, at
this season, they show themselves to the living, who are, however, not
alarmed by it, and in general the spirits do not influence human beings
very much, for better or worse. [] In a number of magical formulæ,
there is an invocation of ancestral spirits, and they receive offerings
in several rites. But there is nothing of the mutual interaction,
of the intimate collaboration between man and spirit which are the
essence of religious cult.
On the other hand, magic, the attempt of man to govern the forces of
nature directly, by means of a special lore, is all-pervading, and
all-important in the Trobriands. [] Sorcery and garden magic have
already been mentioned. Here it must suffice to add, that everything
that vitally affects the native is accompanied by magic. All economic
activities have their magic; love, welfare of babies, talents and
crafts, beauty and agility--all can be fostered or frustrated by
magic. In dealing with the Kula--a pursuit of immense importance
to the natives, and playing on almost all their social passions and
ambitions--we shall meet with another system of magic, and we shall
have then to go more into detail about the subject in general.
Disease, health, or death are also the result of magic or
counter-magic. The Trobrianders have a very complex and very definite
set of theoretical views on these matters. Good health is primarily
of course the natural, normal state. Minor ills may be contracted
by exposure, over-eating, over-strain, bad food, or other ordinary
causes. Such ailments never last, and have never any really bad
effects, nor are they of immediate danger. But, if a man sickens for
any length of time, and his strength seems to be really sapped, then
the evil forces are at work. By far the most prevalent form of black
magic, is that of the bwaga'u, that is the black sorcerer, of whom
there are a number in each district. Usually even in each village
there are one or two men more or less dreaded as bwaga'u. To be one
does not require any special initiation except the knowledge of the
spells. To learn these--that is, to learn them in such a manner as
to become an acknowledged bwaga'u--can only be done by means of high
payment, or in exceptional circumstances. Thus, a father will often
"give" his sorcery to his son, always, however, without payment; or
a commoner will teach it to a man of rank, or a man to his sister's
son. In these two latter cases a very high payment would have to be
given. It is important as a characteristic of the kinship conditions
of this people, that a man receives sorcery gratis from his father,
who according to the traditional kinship system is no blood-relation,
whereas he has to pay for it to his maternal uncle, whose natural
heir he is.
When a man has acquired the black art, he applies it to a first victim,
and this has always to be some one of his own family. It is a firm
and definite belief among all the natives that if a man's sorcery has
to be any good, it must first be practised on his mother or sister,
or any of his maternal kindred. Such a matricidal act makes him a
genuine bwaga'u. His art then can be practised on others, and becomes
an established source of income.
The beliefs about sorcery are complex; they differ according as to
whether taken from a real sorcerer, or from an outsider; and there
are also evidently strata of belief, due perhaps to local variation,
perhaps to superimposed versions. Here a short summary must suffice.
When a sorcerer wants to attack someone, the first step is to cast
a light spell over his habitual haunts, a spell which will affect
him with a slight illness and compel him to keep to his bed in his
house, where he will try to cure himself by lying over a small fire
and warming his body. His first ailment, called kaynagola, comprises
pains in the body, such as (speaking from our point of view) would be
brought about by rheumatism, general cold, influenza, or any incipient
disease. When the victim is in bed, with a fire burning under him, and
also, as a rule, one in the middle of the hut, the bwaga'u stealthily
approaches the house. He is accompanied by a few nightbirds, owls
and night-jars, which keep guard over him, and he is surrounded by
a halo of legendary terrors which make all natives shiver at the
idea of meeting a sorcerer on such a nocturnal visit. He then tries
to insert through the thatch wall a bunch of herbs impregnated with
some deadly charm and tied to a long stick, and these he attempts to
thrust into the fire over which the sick man is lying. If he succeeds,
the fumes of the burnt leaves will be inhaled by the victim, whose
name has been uttered in the charm, and he will be seized by one or
other of the deadly diseases of which the natives have a long list,
with a definite symptomatology, as well as a magical etiology. Thus
the preliminary sorcery was necessary, in order to keep the victim
to his house, in which spot only can the mortal magic be performed.
Of course, the sick man is on the defensive as well. First of all,
his friends and relatives--this is one of the main duties of the wife's
brothers--will keep a close watch over him, sitting with spears round
the hut, and at all approaches to it. Often have I come across such
vigils, when walking late at night through some village. Then, the
services of some rival bwaga'u are invoked (for the art of killing
and curing is always in the same hand), and he utters counter-spells,
so that at times the efforts of the first sorcerer, even should he
succeed in burning the herbs according to the dreaded toginivayu rite,
are fruitless.
Should this be so, he resorts to the final and most fatal rite, that
of the pointing-bone. Uttering powerful spells, the bwaga'u and one or
two accomplices, boil some coco-nut oil in a small pot, far away in a
dense patch of jungle. Leaves of herbs are soaked in the oil, and then
wrapped round a sharp stingaree spine, or some similar pointed object,
and the final incantation, most deadly of all, is chanted over it. Then
the bwaga'u steals towards the village, catches sight of his victim,
and hiding himself behind a shrub or house, points the magical dagger
at him. In fact, he violently and viciously turns it round in the
air, as if to stab the victim, and to twist and wrench the point in
the wound. This, if carried out properly, and not counteracted by a
still more powerful magician, will never fail to kill a man.
I have here summarised the bare outlines of the successive application
of black magic as it is believed by sorcerer and outsider alike to
be done, and to act in producing disease and death. There can be no
doubt that the acts of sorcery are really carried out by those who
believe themselves to possess the black powers. It is equally certain
that the nervous strain of knowing one's life to be threatened by
a bwaga'u is very great, and probably it is much worse when a man
knows that behind the sorcerer stands the might of the chief, and this
apprehension certainly contributes powerfully towards the success of
black magic. On the other hand, a chief, if attacked, would have a
good guard to protect him, and the most powerful wizards to back him
up, and also the authority to deal directly with anyone suspected
of plotting against him. Thus sorcery, which is one of the means of
carrying on the established order, is in its turn strengthened by it.
If we remember that, as in all belief in the miraculous and
supernatural, so also here, there is the loophole of counterforces,
and of the sorcery being incorrectly or inefficiently applied, spoilt
by broken taboos, mispronounced spells, or what not; again, that
suggestion strongly influences the victim, and undermines his natural
resistance; further that all disease is invariably traced back to
some sorcerer or other, who, whether it is true or not, often frankly
admits his responsibility in order to enhance his reputation, there
is then no difficulty in understanding why the belief in black magic
flourishes, why no empirical evidence can ever dispel it, and why the
sorcerer no less than the victim, has confidence in his own powers. At
least, the difficulty is the same as in explaining many contemporary
examples of results achieved by miracles and faith healing, such as
Christian Science or Lourdes, or in any cure by prayers and devotion.
Although by far the most important of them all, the bwaga'u is only one
among the beings who can cause disease and death. The often-mentioned
flying-witches, who come always from the Southern half of the island,
or from the East, from the islands of Kitava, Iwa, Gava, or Murua, are
even more deadly. All very rapid and violent diseases, more especially
such as show no direct, perceptible symptoms, are attributed to the
mulukwausi, as they are called. Invisible, they fly through the air,
and perch on trees, house-tops, and other high places. From there,
they pounce upon a man or woman and remove and hide "the inside,"
that is, the lungs, heart and guts, or the brains and tongue. Such a
victim will die within a day or two, unless another witch, called for
the purpose and well paid, goes in search and restores the missing
"inside." Of course, sometimes it is too late to do it, as the meal
has been eaten in the meantime! Then the victim must die.
Another powerful agency of death consists of the tauva'u, non-human
though anthropomorphic beings, who cause all epidemic disease. When,
at the end of the rainy season the new and unripe yams have come in,
and dysentery rages, decimating the villages; or, when in hot and
damp years an infectious disease passes over the district, taking
heavy toll, this means that the tauva'u have come from the South, and
that, invisible, they march through the villages, rattling their lime
gourds, and with their sword-clubs or sticks hitting their victims, who
immediately sicken and die. The tauva'u can, at will, assume the shape
of man or reptile. He appears then as a snake, or crab, or lizard,
and you recognise him at once, for he will not run away from you,
and he has as a rule a patch of some gaudy colour on his skin. It
would be a fatal thing to kill such a reptile. On the contrary, it
has to be taken up cautiously and treated as a chief; that is to say,
it is placed on a high platform, and some of the valuable tokens of
wealth--a polished green stone blade, or a pair of arm-shells, or a
necklace of spondylus shell beads must be put before it as an offering.
It is very interesting to note that the tauva'u are believed to come
from the Northern coast of Normanby Island, from the district of
Du'a'u, and more especially from a place called Sewatupa. This is the
very place where, according to Dobuan belief and myth, their sorcery
originated. Thus, what to the local tribes of the originating place
is ordinary sorcery, practised by men, becomes, when looked at from a
great distance, and from an alien tribe, a non-human agency, endowed
with such super-normal powers as changing of shape, invisibility,
and a direct, infallible method of inflicting death.
The tauva'u have sometimes sexual intercourse with women; several
present cases are on record, and such women who have a familiar tauva'u
become dangerous witches, though how they practise their witchcraft
is not quite clear to the natives.
A much less dangerous being is the tokway, a wood-sprite, living in
trees and rocks, stealing crops from the field and from the yam-houses,
and inflicting slight ailments. Some men in the past have acquired
the knowledge of how to do this from the tokway, and have handed it
on to their descendants.
So we see that, except for the very light ailments which pass quickly
and easily, all disease is attributed to sorcery. Even accidents are
not believed to happen without cause. That this is the case also with
drowning, we shall learn more in detail, when we have to follow the
Trobrianders in their dangerous sea-trips. Natural death, caused by
old age, is admittedly possible, but when I asked in several concrete
cases, in which age was obviously the cause, why such and such a man
died, I was always told that a bwaga'u was at the back of it. Only
suicide and death in battle have a different place in the mind of the
natives, and this is also confirmed by the belief that people killed
in war, those that commit suicide, and those who are bewitched to
death have, each class, their own way to the other world.
This sketch of Trobriand tribal life, belief and customs must suffice,
and we shall still have opportunities of enlarging upon these subjects
that most matter to us for the present study.
VIII
Two more districts remain to be mentioned, through which the Kula
trade passes on its circuit, before it returns to the place from
where we started. One of them is the Eastern portion of the Northern
Massim, comprising the Marshall Bennett Islands (Kitava, Iwa, Gawa,
Kwayawata), and Woodlark Island (Murua), with the small group of Nada
Islands. The other district is that of St. Aignan Island, called by
the natives Masima, or Misima, with the smaller island Panayati.
Looking from the rocky shores of Boyowa, at its narrowest point, we
can see over the white breakers on the fringing reef and over the sea,
here always blue and limpid, the silhouette of a flat-topped, low rock,
almost due East. This is Kitava. To the Trobrianders of the Eastern
districts, this island and those behind it are the promised land
of the Kula, just as Dobu is to the natives of Southern Boyowa. But
here, unlike in the South, they have to deal with tribesmen who speak
their own language, with dialectic differences only, and who have very
much the same institutions and customs. In fact, the nearest island,
Kitava, differs only very little from the Trobriands. Although the
more distant islands, especially Murua, have a slightly different
form of totemism, with hardly any idea of rank attached to the
sub-clans, and consequently no chieftainship in the Trobriand
sense, yet their social organisation is also much the same as in the
Western province. [] I know the natives only from having seen them
very frequently and in great numbers in the Trobriands, where they
come on Kula expeditions. In Murua, however, I spent a short time
doing field-work in the village of Dikoyas. In appearance, dress,
ornaments and manners, the natives are indistinguishable from the
Trobrianders. Their ideas and customs in matters of sex, marriage,
and kinship are, with variations in detail only, the same as in
Boyowa. In beliefs and mythology, they also belong to the same culture.
To the Trobrianders, the Eastern islands are also the chief home and
stronghold of the dreaded mulukwausi (flying witches); the land whence
love magic came, originating in the island of Iwa; the distant shores
towards which the mythical hero Tudava sailed, performing many feats,
till he finally disappeared, no one knows where. The most recent
version is that he most likely finished his career in the white man's
country. To the Eastern islands, says native belief, the spirits of
the dead, killed by sorcery, go round on a short visit not stopping
there, only floating through the air like clouds, before they turn
round to the North-West to Tuma.
From these islands, many important products come to Boyowa (the
Trobriands), but none half as important as the tough, homogeneous
green-stone, from which all their implements were made in the past,
and of which the ceremonial axes are made up till now. Some of these
places are renowned for their yam gardens, especially Kitava, and it is
recognised that the best carving in black ebony comes from there. The
most important point of difference between the natives of this district
and the Trobrianders, lies in the method of mortuary distributions,
to which subject we shall have to return in a later part of the book,
as it is closely connected with Kula.
From Murua (Woodlark Island) the Kula track curves over to the South
in two different branches, one direct to Tubetube, and the other to
Misima, and thence to Tubetube and Wari. The district of Misima is
almost entirely unknown to me--I have only spoken once or twice with
natives of this island, and there is not, to my knowledge, any reliable
published information about that district, so we shall have to pass
it over with a very few words. This is, however, not so alarming,
because it is certain, even from the little I know about them, that
the natives do not essentially differ from the other Massim. They
are totemic and matrilineal; there is no chieftainship, and the form
of authority is the same as in the Southern Massim. Their sorcerers
and witches resemble those of the Southern Massim and Dobuans. In
industries, they specialise in canoe-building, and in the small
island of Panayati produce the same type of craft as the natives of
Gawa and Woodlark Island, slightly different only from the Trobriand
canoe. In the island of Misima, a very big supply of areca (betel)
nut is produced, as there is a custom of planting a number of these
nuts after a man's death.
The small islands of Tubetube and Wari, which form the final link of
the Kula, lie already within the district of the Southern Massim. In
fact, the island of Tubetube is one of the places studied in detail
by Professor Seligman, and its ethnographical description is one of
three parallel monographs which form the division of the Southern
Massim in the treatise so often quoted.
Finally, I want to point out again that the descriptions of the
various Kula districts given in this and in the previous chapter,
though accurate in every detail, are not meant to be an exhaustive
ethnographic sketch of the tribes. They have been given with a few
light touches in order to produce a vivid and so-to-speak personal
impression of the various type of natives, and countries and of
cultures. If I have succeeded in giving a physiognomy to each of the
various tribes, to the Trobrianders, to the Amphlettans, the Dobuans,
and the Southern Massim, and in arousing some interest in them,
the main purpose has been achieved, and the necessary ethnographic
background for the Kula has been supplied.