THE ESSENTIALS OF THE KULA


I

Having thus described the scene, and the actors, let us now proceed
to the performance. The Kula is a form of exchange, of extensive,
inter-tribal character; it is carried on by communities inhabiting a
wide ring of islands, which form a closed circuit. This circuit can be
seen on Map V, where it is represented by the lines joining a number
of islands to the North and East of the East end of New Guinea. Along
this route, articles of two kinds, and these two kinds only, are
constantly travelling in opposite directions. In the direction of the
hands of a clock, moves constantly one of these kinds--long necklaces
of red shell, called soulava (Plates XVIII and XIX). In the opposite
direction moves the other kind--bracelets of white shell called mwali
(Plates XVI and XVII). Each of these articles, as it travels in its
own direction on the closed circuit, meets on its way articles of
the other class, and is constantly being exchanged for them. Every
movement of the Kula articles, every detail of the transactions is
fixed and regulated by a set of traditional rules and conventions,
and some acts of the Kula are accompanied by an elaborate magical
ritual and public ceremonies.

On every island and in every village, a more or less limited number of
men take part in the Kula--that is to say, receive the goods, hold them
for a short time, and then pass them on. Therefore every man who is in
the Kula, periodically though not regularly, receives one or several
mwali (arm-shells), or a soulava (necklace of red shell discs), and
then has to hand it on to one of his partners, from whom he receives
the opposite commodity in exchange. Thus no man ever keeps any of the
articles for any length of time in his possession. One transaction
does not finish the Kula relationship, the rule being "once in the
Kula, always in the Kula," and a partnership between two men is a
permanent and lifelong affair. Again, any given mwali or soulava
may always be found travelling and changing hands, and there is no
question of its ever settling down, so that the principle "once in
the Kula, always in the Kula" applies also to the valuables themselves.

The ceremonial exchange of the two articles is the main, the
fundamental aspect of the Kula. But associated with it, and done
under its cover, we find a great number of secondary activities
and features. Thus, side by side with the ritual exchange of
arm-shells and necklaces, the natives carry on ordinary trade,
bartering from one island to another a great number of utilities,
often unprocurable in the district to which they are imported, and
indispensable there. Further, there are other activities, preliminary
to the Kula, or associated with it, such as the building of sea-going
canoes for the expeditions, certain big forms of mortuary ceremonies,
and preparatory taboos.

The Kula is thus an extremely big and complex institution, both in
its geographical extent, and in the manifoldness of its component
pursuits. It welds together a considerable number of tribes, and it
embraces a vast complex of activities, interconnected, and playing
into one another, so as to form one organic whole.

Yet it must be remembered that what appears to us an extensive,
complicated, and yet well ordered institution is the outcome of ever
so many doings and pursuits, carried on by savages, who have no laws
or aims or charters definitely laid down. They have no knowledge of
the total outline of any of their social structure. They know their
own motives, know the purpose of individual actions and the rules
which apply to them, but how, out of these, the whole collective
institution shapes, this is beyond their mental range. Not even
the most intelligent native has any clear idea of the Kula as a big,
organised social construction, still less of its sociological function
and implications. If you were to ask him what the Kula is, he would
answer by giving a few details, most likely by giving his personal
experiences and subjective views on the Kula, but nothing approaching
the definition just given here. Not even a partial coherent account
could be obtained. For the integral picture does not exist in his mind;
he is in it, and cannot see the whole from the outside.

The integration of all the details observed, the achievement of a
sociological synthesis of all the various, relevant symptoms, is the
task of the Ethnographer. First of all, he has to find out that certain
activities, which at first sight might appear incoherent and not
correlated, have a meaning. He then has to find out what is constant
and relevant in these activities, and what accidental and inessential,
that is, to find out the laws and rules of all the transactions. Again,
the Ethnographer has to construct the picture of the big institution,
very much as the physicist constructs his theory from the experimental
data, which always have been within reach of everybody, but which
needed a consistent interpretation. I have touched on this point of
method in the Introduction (Divisions V and VI), but I have repeated it
here, as it is necessary to grasp it clearly in order not to lose the
right perspective of conditions as they really exist among the natives.




II

In giving the above abstract and concise definition, I had to reverse
the order of research, as this is done in ethnographic field-work,
where the most generalised inferences are obtained as the result
of long inquiries and laborious inductions. The general definition
of the Kula will serve as a sort of plan or diagram in our further
concrete and detailed descriptions. And this is the more necessary
as the Kula is concerned with the exchange of wealth and utilities,
and therefore it is an economic institution, and there is no other
aspect of primitive life where our knowledge is more scanty and our
understanding more superficial than in Economics. Hence misconception
is rampant, and it is necessary to clear the ground when approaching
any economic subject.

Thus in the Introduction we called the Kula a "form of trade," and we
ranged it alongside other systems of barter. This is quite correct,
if we give the word "trade" a sufficiently wide interpretation, and
mean by it any exchange of goods. But the word "trade" is used in
current Ethnography and economic literature with so many different
implications that a whole lot of misleading, preconceived ideas have
to be brushed aside in order to grasp the facts correctly. Thus the
aprioric current notion of primitive trade would be that of an exchange
of indispensable or useful articles, done without much ceremony or
regulation, under stress of dearth or need, in spasmodic, irregular
intervals--and this done either by direct barter, everyone looking
out sharply not to be done out of his due, or, if the savages were
too timid and distrustful to face one another, by some customary
arrangement, securing by means of heavy penalties compliance in
the obligations incurred or imposed. [35] Waiving for the present
the question how far this conception is valid or not in general--in
my opinion it is quite misleading--we have to realise clearly that
the Kula contradicts in almost every point the above definition of
"savage trade." It shows to us primitive exchange in an entirely
different light.

The Kula is not a surreptitious and precarious form of exchange. It is,
quite on the contrary, rooted in myth, backed by traditional law, and
surrounded with magical rites. All its main transactions are public
and ceremonial, and carried out according to definite rules. It is
not done on the spur of the moment, but happens periodically, at
dates settled in advance, and it is carried on along definite trade
routes, which must lead to fixed trysting places. Sociologically,
though transacted between tribes differing in language, culture,
and probably even in race, it is based on a fixed and permanent
status, on a partnership which binds into couples some thousands of
individuals. This partnership is a lifelong relationship, it implies
various mutual duties and privileges, and constitutes a type of
inter-tribal relationship on an enormous scale. As to the economic
mechanism of the transactions, this is based on a specific form of
credit, which implies a high degree of mutual trust and commercial
honour--and this refers also to the subsidiary, minor trade, which
accompanies the Kula proper. Finally, the Kula is not done under
stress of any need, since its main aim is to exchange articles which
are of no practical use.

From the concise definition of Kula given at the beginning of this
chapter, we see that in its final essence, divested of all trappings
and accessories, it is a very simple affair, which at first sight
might even appear tame and unromantic. After all, it only consists
of an exchange, interminably repeated, of two articles intended for
ornamentation, but not even used for that to any extent. Yet this
simple action--this passing from hand to hand of two meaningless
and quite useless objects--has somehow succeeded in becoming the
foundation of a big inter-tribal institution, in being associated with
ever so many other activities. Myth, magic and tradition have built
up around it definite ritual and ceremonial forms, have given it a
halo of romance and value in the minds of the natives, have indeed
created a passion in their hearts for this simple exchange.

The definition of the Kula must now be amplified, and we must describe
one after the other its fundamental characteristics and main rules,
so that it may be clearly grasped by what mechanism the mere exchange
of two articles results in an institution so vast, complex, and
deeply rooted.




III

First of all, a few words must be said about the two principal
objects of exchange, the arm-shells (mwali) and the necklaces
(soulava). The arm-shells are obtained by breaking off the top and
the narrow end of a big, cone-shaped shell (Conus millepunctatus),
and then polishing up the remaining ring. These bracelets are highly
coveted by all the Papuo-Melanesians of New Guinea, and they spread
even into the pure Papuan district of the Gulf. [36] The manner of
wearing the arm-shells is illustrated by Plate XVII, where the men
have put them on on purpose to be photographed.

The use of the small discs of red spondylus shell, out of which
the soulava are made, is also of a very wide diffusion. There is a
manufacturing centre of them in one of the villages in Port Moresby,
and also in several places in Eastern New Guinea, notably in Rossell
Island, and in the Trobriands. I have said "use" on purpose here,
because these small beads, each of them a flat, round disc with a hole
in the centre, coloured anything from muddy brown to carmine red, are
employed in various ways for ornamentation. They are most generally
used as part of earrings, made of rings of turtle shell, which are
attached to the ear lobe, and from which hang a cluster of the shell
discs. These earrings are very much worn, and, especially among the
Massim, you see them on the ears of every second man or woman, while
others are satisfied with turtle shell alone, unornamented with the
shell discs. Another everyday ornament, frequently met with and worn,
especially by young girls and boys, consists of a short necklace,
just encircling the neck, made of the red spondylus discs, with one
or more cowrie shell pendants. These shell discs can be, and often
are, used in the make-up of the various classes of the more elaborate
ornaments, worn on festive occasions only. Here, however, we are more
especially concerned with the very long necklaces, measuring from two
to five metres, made of spondylus discs, of which there are two main
varieties, one, much the finer, with a big shell pendant, the other
made of bigger discs, and with a few cowrie shells or black banana
seeds in the centre (see Plate XVIII).

The arm-shells on the one hand, and the long spondylus shell strings
on the other, the two main Kula articles, are primarily ornaments. As
such, they are used with the most elaborate dancing dress only,
and on very festive occasions such as big ceremonial dances, great
feasts, and big gatherings, where several villages are represented,
as can be seen in Plate VI. Never could they be used as everyday
ornaments, nor on occasions of minor importance, such as a small
dance in the village, a harvest gathering, a love-making expedition,
when facial painting, floral decoration and smaller though not quite
everyday ornaments are worn (see Plates XII and XIII). But even
though usable and sometimes used, this is not the main function of
these articles. Thus, a chief may have several shell strings in his
possession, and a few arm-shells. Supposing that a big dance is held
in his or in a neighbouring village, he will not put on his ornaments
himself if he goes to assist at it, unless he intends to dance
and decorate himself, but any of his relatives, his children or his
friends and even vassals, can have the use of them for the asking. If
you go to a feast or a dance where there are a number of men wearing
such ornaments, and ask anyone of them at random to whom it belongs,
the chances are that more than half of them will answer that they
themselves are not the owners, but that they had the articles lent to
them. These objects are not owned in order to be used; the privilege
of decorating oneself with them is not the real aim of possession.

Indeed--and this is more significant--by far the greater number of the
arm-shells, easily ninety per cent., are of too small a size to be worn
even by young boys and girls. A few are so big and valuable that they
would not be worn at all, except once in a decade by a very important
man on a very festive day. Though all the shell-strings can be worn,
some of them are again considered too valuable, and are cumbersome
for frequent use, and would be worn on very exceptional occasions only.

This negative description leaves us with the questions: why, then,
are these objects valued, what purpose do they serve? The full answer
to this question will emerge out of the whole story contained in the
following chapters, but an approximate idea must be given at once. As
it is always better to approach the unknown through the known, let us
consider for a moment whether among ourselves we have not some type of
objects which play a similar rôle and which are used and possessed in
the same manner. When, after a six years' absence in the South Seas and
Australia, I returned to Europe and did my first bit of sight-seeing
in Edinburgh Castle, I was shown the Crown jewels. The keeper told
many stories of how they were worn by this or that king or queen
on such and such occasion, of how some of them had been taken over
to London, to the great and just indignation of the whole Scottish
nation, how they were restored, and how now everyone can be pleased,
since they are safe under lock and key, and no one can touch them. As
I was looking at them and thinking how ugly, useless, ungainly, even
tawdry they were, I had the feeling that something similar had been
told to me of late, and that I had seen many other objects of this
sort, which made a similar impression on me.

And then arose before me the vision of a native village on coral soil,
and a small, rickety platform temporarily erected under a pandanus
thatch, surrounded by a number of brown, naked men, and one of them
showing me long, thin red strings, and big, white, worn-out objects,
clumsy to sight and greasy to touch. With reverence he also would name
them, and tell their history, and by whom and when they were worn,
and how they changed hands, and how their temporary possession was a
great sign of the importance and glory of the village. The analogy
between the European and the Trobriand vaygu'a (valuables) must be
delimited with more precision. The Crown jewels, in fact, any heirlooms
too valuable and too cumbersome to be worn, represent the same type as
vaygu'a in that they are merely possessed for the sake of possession
itself, and the ownership of them with the ensuing renown is the main
source of their value. Also both heirlooms and vaygu'a are cherished
because of the historical sentiment which surrounds them. However ugly,
useless, and--according to current standards--valueless an object
may be, if it has figured in historical scenes and passed through
the hands of historic persons, and is therefore an unfailing vehicle
of important sentimental associations, it cannot but be precious to
us. This historic sentimentalism, which indeed has a large share in
our general interest in studies of past events, exists also in the
South Seas. Every really good Kula article has its individual name,
round each there is a sort of history and romance in the traditions
of the natives. Crown jewels or heirlooms are insignia of rank and
symbols of wealth respectively, and in olden days with us, and in New
Guinea up till a few years ago, both rank and wealth went together. The
main point of difference is that the Kula goods are only in possession
for a time, whereas the European treasure must be permanently owned
in order to have full value.

Taking a broader, ethnological view of the question, we may class
the Kula valuables among the many "ceremonial" objects of wealth;
enormous, carved and decorated weapons, stone implements, articles of
domestic and industrial nature, too well decorated and too clumsy for
use. Such things are usually called "ceremonial," but this word seems
to cover a great number of meanings and much that has no meaning at
all. In fact, very often, especially on museum labels, an article is
called "ceremonial" simply because nothing is known about its uses and
general nature. Speaking only about museum exhibits from New Guinea,
I can say that many so-called ceremonial objects are nothing but
simply overgrown objects of use, which preciousness of material and
amount of labour expended have transformed into reservoirs of condensed
economic value. Again, others are used on festive occasions, but play
no part whatever in rites and ceremonies, and serve for decoration
only, and these might be called objects of parade (comp. Chap. VI,
Div. I). Finally, a number of these articles function actually as
instruments of a magical or religious rite, and belong to the intrinsic
apparatus of a ceremony. Such and such only could be correctly called
ceremonial. During the So'i feasts among the Southern Massim, women
carrying polished axe blades in fine carved handles, accompany with a
rhythmic step to the beat of drums, the entry of the pigs and mango
saplings into the village (see Plates V and VI). As this is part
of the ceremony and the axes are an indispensable accessory, their
use in this case can be legitimately called "ceremonial." Again,
in certain magical ceremonies in the Trobriands, the towosi (garden
magician) has to carry a mounted axe blade on his shoulders, and with
it he delivers a ritual blow at a kamkokola structure (see Plate LIX;
compare Chapter II, Division IV).

The vaygu'a--the Kula valuables--in one of their aspects are overgrown
objects of use. They are also, however, ceremonial objects in the
narrow and correct sense of the word. This will become clear after
perusal of the following pages, and to this point we shall return in
the last chapter.

It must be kept in mind that here we are trying to obtain a clear and
vivid idea of what the Kula valuables are to the natives, and not to
give a detailed and circumstantial description of them, nor to define
them with precision. The comparison with the European heirlooms or
Crown jewels was given in order to show that this type of ownership
is not entirely a fantastic South Sea custom, untranslatable into our
ideas. For--and this is a point I want to stress--the comparison I
have made is not based on purely external, superficial similarity. The
psychological and sociological forces at work are the same, it is
really the same mental attitude which makes us value our heirlooms,
and makes the natives in New Guinea value their vaygu'a.




IV

The exchange of these two classes of vaygu'a, of the armshells and the
necklaces, constitutes the main act of the Kula. This exchange is not
done freely, right and left, as opportunity offers, and where the whim
leads. It is subject indeed to strict limitations and regulations. One
of these refers to the sociology of the exchange, and entails that
Kula transactions can be done only between partners. A man who is in
the Kula--for not everyone within its district is entitled to carry
it on--has only a limited number of people with whom he does it. This
partnership is entered upon in a definite manner, under fulfilment of
certain formalities, and it constitutes a life-long relationship. The
number of partners a man has varies with his rank and importance. A
commoner in the Trobriands would have a few partners only, whereas
a chief would number hundreds of them. There is no special social
mechanism to limit the partnership of some people and extend that of
the others, but a man would naturally know to what number of partners
he was entitled by his rank and position. And there would be always the
example of his immediate ancestors to guide him. In other tribes, where
the distinction of rank is not so pronounced, an old man of standing,
or a headman of a hamlet or village would also have hundreds of Kula
associates, whereas a man of minor importance would have but few.

Two Kula partners have to kula with one another, and exchange other
gifts incidentally; they behave as friends, and have a number of
mutual duties and obligations, which vary with the distance between
their villages and with their reciprocal status. An average man has a
few partners near by, as a rule his relations-in-law or his friends,
and with these partners, he is generally on very friendly terms. The
Kula partnership is one of the special bonds which unite two men
into one of the standing relations of mutual exchange of gifts and
services so characteristic of these natives. Again, the average man
will have one or two chiefs in his or in the neighbouring districts
with whom he kulas. In such a case, he would be bound to assist and
serve them in various ways, and to offer them the pick of his vaygu'a
when he gets a fresh supply. On the other hand he would expect them
to be specially liberal to him.

The overseas partner is, on the other hand, a host, patron and ally
in a land of danger and insecurity. Nowadays, though the feeling of
danger still persists, and natives never feel safe and comfortable
in a strange district, this danger is rather felt as a magical one,
and it is more the fear of foreign sorcery that besets them. In
olden days, more tangible dangers were apprehended, and the partner
was the main guarantee of safety. He also provides with food, gives
presents, and his house, though never used to sleep in, is the place
in which to foregather while in the village. Thus the Kula partnership
provides every man within its ring with a few friends near at hand,
and with some friendly allies in the far-away, dangerous, foreign
districts. These are the only people with whom he can kula, but,
of course, amongst all his partners, he is free to choose to which
one he will offer which object.

Let us now try to cast a broad glance at the cumulative effects
of the rules of partnership. We see that all around the ring of
Kula there is a network of relationships, and that naturally the
whole forms one interwoven fabric. Men living at hundreds of miles'
sailing distance from one another are bound together by direct or
intermediate partnership, exchange with each other, know of each
other, and on certain occasions meet in a large intertribal gathering
(Plate XX). Objects given by one, in time reach some very distant
indirect partner or other, and not only Kula objects, but various
articles of domestic use and minor gifts. It is easy to see that in
the long run, not only objects of material culture, but also customs,
songs, art motives and general cultural influences travel along the
Kula route. It is a vast, inter-tribal net of relationships, a big
institution, consisting of thousands of men, all bound together by
one common passion for Kula exchange, and secondarily, by many minor
ties and interests.

Returning again to the personal aspect of the Kula, let us take a
concrete example, that of an average man who lives, let us assume,
in the village of Sinaketa, an important Kula centre in the Southern
Trobriands. He has a few partners, near and far, but they again fall
into categories, those who give him arm-shells, and those who give
him necklaces. For it is naturally an invariable rule of the Kula that
arm-shells and necklaces are never received from the same man, since
they must travel in different directions. If one partner gives the
armshells, and I return to him a necklace, all future operations have
to be of the same type. More than that, the nature of the operation
between me, the man of Sinaketa, and my partner, is determined by our
relative positions with regard to the points of the compass. Thus I,
in Sinaketa, would receive from the North and East only arm-shells;
from the South and West, necklaces are given to me. If I have a near
partner next door to me, if his abode is North or East of mine,
he will always be giving me arm-shells and receiving necklaces
from me. If, at a later time he were to shift his residence within
the village, the old relationship would obtain, but if he became
a member of another village community on the other side of me the
relationship would be reversed. The partners in villages to the North
of Sinaketa, in the district of Luba, Kulumata, or Kiriwina all supply
me with arm-shells. These I hand over to my partners in the South,
and receive from them necklaces. The South in this case means the
southern districts of Boyowa, as well as the Amphletts and Dobu.

Thus every man has to obey definite rules as to the geographical
direction of his transactions. At any point in the Kula ring, if
we imagine him turned towards the centre of the circle, he receives
the arm-shells with his left hand, and the necklaces with his right,
and then hands them both on. In other words, he constantly passes the
arm-shells from left to right, and the necklaces from right to left.

Applying this rule of personal conduct to the whole Kula ring,
we can see at once what the aggregate result is. The sum total
of exchanges will not result in an aimless shifting of the two
classes of article, in a fortuitous come and go of the armshells and
necklaces. Two continuous streams will constantly flow on, the one
of necklaces following the hands of a clock, and the other, composed
of the arm-shells, in the opposite direction. We see thus that it
is quite correct to speak of the circular exchange of the Kula, of a
ring or circuit of moving articles (comp. Map V). On this ring, all
the villages are placed in a definitely fixed position with regard
to one another, so that one is always on either the arm-shell or on
the necklace side of the other.

Now we pass to another rule of the Kula, of the greatest importance. As
just explained "the armshells and shell-strings always travel in their
own respective directions on the ring, and they are never, under
any circumstances, traded back in the wrong direction. Also, they
never stop. It seems almost incredible at first, but it is the fact,
nevertheless, that no one ever keeps any of the Kula: valuables for
any length of time. Indeed, in the whole of the Trobriands there are
perhaps only one or two specially fine armshells and shell-necklaces
permanently owned as heirlooms, and these are set apart as a special
class, and are once and for all out of the Kula. 'Ownership,'
therefore, in Kula, is quite a special economic relation. A man who
is in the Kula never keeps any article for longer than, say, a year
or two. Even this exposes him to the reproach of being niggardly, and
certain districts have the bad reputation of being 'slow' and 'hard'
in the Kula. On the other hand, each man has an enormous number of
articles passing through his hands during his life time, of which
he enjoys a temporary possession, and which he keeps in trust for a
time. This possession hardly ever makes him use the articles, and
he remains under the obligation soon again to hand them on to one
of his partners. But the temporary ownership allows him to draw a
great deal of renown, to exhibit his article, to tell how he obtained
it, and to plan to whom he is going to give it. And all this forms
one of the favourite subjects of tribal conversation and gossip,
in which the feats and the glory in Kula of chiefs or commoners are
constantly discussed and re-discussed." [37] Thus every article moves
in one direction only, never comes back, never permanently stops,
and takes as a rule some two to ten years to make the round.

This feature of the Kula is perhaps its most remarkable one, since it
creates a new type of ownership, and places the two Kula articles in a
class of their own. Here we can return to the comparison drawn between
the vaygu'a (Kiriwinian valuables) and the European heirlooms. This
comparison broke down on one point: in the European objects of this
class, permanent ownership, lasting association with the hereditary
dignity or rank or with a family, is one of its main features. In
this the Kula articles differ from heirlooms, but resemble another
type of valued object, that is, trophies, gauges of superiority,
sporting cups, objects which are kept for a time only by the winning
party, whether a group or an individual. Though held only in trust,
only for a period, though never used in any utilitarian way, yet the
holders get from them a special type of pleasure by the mere fact of
owning them, of being entitled to them. Here again, it is not only
a superficial, external resemblance, but very much the same mental
attitude, favoured by similar social arrangements. The resemblance
goes so far that in the Kula there exists also the element of pride
in merit, an element which forms the main ingredient in the pleasure
felt by a man or group holding a trophy. Success in Kula is ascribed
to special, personal power, due mainly to magic, and men are very
proud of it. Again, the whole community glories in a specially fine
Kula trophy, obtained by one of its members.

All the rules so far enumerated--looking at them from the
individual point of view--limit the social range and the direction
of the transactions as well as the duration of ownership of the
articles. Looking at them from the point of view of their integral
effect, they shape the general outline of the Kula, give it the
character of the double-closed circuit. Now a few words must be said
about the nature of each individual transaction, in so far as its
commercial technicalities are concerned. Here very definite rules
also obtain.




V

The main principle underlying the regulations of actual exchange
is that the Kula consists in the bestowing of a ceremonial gift,
which has to be repaid by an equivalent counter-gift after a lapse
of time, be it a few hours or even minutes, though sometimes as much
as a year or more may elapse between payments. [38] But it can never
be exchanged from hand to hand, with the equivalence between the two
objects discussed, bargained about and computed. The decorum of the
Kula transaction is strictly kept, and highly valued. The natives
sharply distinguish it from barter, which they practise extensively,
of which they have a clear idea, and for which they have a settled
term--in Kiriwinian: gimwali. Often, when criticising an incorrect,
too hasty, or indecorous procedure of Kula, they will say: "He conducts
his Kula as if it were gimwali."

The second very important principle is that the equivalence of the
counter-gift is left to the giver, and it cannot be enforced by any
kind of coercion. A partner who has received a Kula gift is expected
to give back fair and full value, that is, to give as good an arm-shell
as the necklace he receives, or vice versa. Again, a very fine article
must be replaced by one of equivalent value, and not by several minor
ones, though intermediate gifts may be given to mark time before the
real repayment takes place.

If the article given as counter-gift is not equivalent, the recipient
will be disappointed and angry, but he has no direct means of redress,
no means of coercing his partner, or of putting an end to the whole
transaction. What then are the forces at work which keep the partners
to the terms of the bargain? Here we come up against a very important
feature of the native's mental attitude towards wealth and value. The
great misconception of attributing to the savage a pure economic
nature, might lead us to reason incorrectly thus: "The passion of
acquiring, the loathing to lose or give away, is the fundamental and
most primitive element in man's attitude to wealth. In primitive man,
this primitive characteristic will appear in its simplest and purest
form. Grab and never let go will be the guiding principle of his
life." [39] The fundamental error in this reasoning is that it assumes
that "primitive man," as represented by the present-day savage, lives,
at least in economic matters, untrammelled by conventions and social
restrictions. Quite the reverse is the case. Although, like every
human being, the Kula native loves to possess and therefore desires
to acquire and dreads to lose, the social code of rules, with regard
to give and take by far overrides his natural acquisitive tendency.

This social code, such as we find it among the natives of the Kula is,
however, far from weakening the natural desirability of possession;
on the contrary, it lays down that to possess is to be great, and that
wealth is the indispensable appanage of social rank and attribute of
personal virtue. But the important point is that with them to possess
is to give--and here the natives differ from us notably. A man who
owns a thing is naturally expected to share it, to distribute it,
to be its trustee and dispenser. And the higher the rank the greater
the obligation. A chief will naturally be expected to give food to any
stranger, visitor, even loiterer from another end of the village. He
will be expected to share any of the betel-nut or tobacco he has
about him. So that a man of rank will have to hide away any surplus of
these articles which he wants to preserve for his further use. In the
Eastern end of New Guinea a type of large basket, with three layers,
manufactured in the Trobriands, was specially popular among people
of consequence, because one could hide away one's small treasures
in the lower compartments. Thus the main symptom of being powerful
is to be wealthy, and of wealth is to be generous. Meanness, indeed,
is the most despised vice, and the only thing about which the natives
have strong moral views, while generosity is the essence of goodness.

This moral injunction and ensuing habit of generosity, superficially
observed and misinterpreted, is responsible for another wide-spread
misconception, that of the Primitive communism of savages. This, quite
as much as the diametrically opposed figment of the acquisitive and
ruthlessly tenacious native, is definitely erroneous, and this will
be seen with sufficient clearness in the following chapters.

Thus the fundamental principle of the natives' moral code in
this matter makes a man do his fair share in Kula transaction and
the more important he is, the more will he desire to shine by his
generosity. Noblesse oblige is in reality the social norm regulating
their conduct. This does not mean that people are always satisfied,
and that there are no squabbles about the transactions, no resentments
and even feuds. It is obvious that, however much a man may want to
give a good equivalent for the object received, he may not be able to
do so. And then, as there is always a keen competition to be the most
generous giver, a man who has received less than he gave will not keep
his grievance to himself, but will brag about his own generosity and
compare it to his partner's meanness; the other resents it, and the
quarrel is ready to break out. But it is very important to realise
that there is no actual haggling, no tendency to do a man out of his
share. The giver is quite as keen as the receiver that the gift should
be generous, though for different reasons. Then, of course, there is
the important consideration that a man who is fair and generous in
the Kula will attract a larger stream to himself than a mean one.

The two main principles, namely, first that the Kula is a gift repaid
after an interval of time by a counter-gift, and not a bartering;
and second, that the equivalent rests with the giver, and cannot
be enforced, nor can there be any haggling or going back on the
exchange--these underlie all the transactions. A concrete outline of
how they are carried on, will give a sufficient preliminary idea.

"Let us suppose that I, a Sinaketa man, am in possession of a
pair of big armshells. An overseas expedition from Dobu in the
d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago, arrives at my village. Blowing a conch
shell, I take my armshell pair and I offer it to my overseas partner,
with some such words as 'This is a vaga (opening gift)--in due time,
thou returnest to me a big soulava (necklace) for it!' Next year,
when I visit my partner's village, he either is in possession of an
equivalent necklace, and this he gives to me as yotile (return gift),
or he has not a necklace good enough to repay my last gift. In this
case he will give me a small necklace--avowedly not equivalent to my
gift--and he will give it to me as basi (intermediary gift). This means
that the main gift has to be repaid on a future occasion, and the basi
is given in token of good faith--but it, in turn, must be repaid by me
in the meantime by a gift of small arm-shells. The final gift, which
will be given to me to clinch the whole transaction, would then be
called kudu (clinching gift) in contrast to basi" (loc. cit., p. 99).

Although haggling and bargaining are completely ruled out of the
Kula, there are customary and regulated ways of bidding for a piece
of vaygu'a known to be in the possession of one's partner. This is
done by the offer of what we shall call solicitary gifts, of which
there are several types. "If I, an inhabitant of Sinaketa, happen
to be in possession of a pair of arm-shells more than usually good,
the fame of it spreads, for it must be remembered that each one of
the first-class armshells and necklaces has a personal name and a
history of its own, and as they circulate around the big ring of
the Kula, they are all well known, and their appearance in a given
district always creates a sensation. Now, all my partners--whether
from overseas or from within the district--compete for the favour of
receiving this particular article of mine, and those who are specially
keen try to obtain it by giving me pokala (offerings) and kaributu
(solicitary gifts). The former (pokala) consist as a rule of pigs,
especially fine bananas, and yams or taro; the latter (kaributu)
are of greater value: the valuable, large axe-blades (called beku),
or lime spoons of whale bone are given" (loc. cit., p. 100). The
further complication in the repayment of these solicitary gifts and a
few more technicalities and technical expressions connected herewith
will be given later on in Chapter IV.




VI

I have enumerated the main rules of the Kula in a manner sufficient
for a preliminary definition, and now a few words must be said about
the associated activities and secondary aspects of the Kula. If we
realise that at times the exchange has to take place between districts
divided by dangerous seas, over which a great number of people have to
travel by sail, and do so keeping to appointed dates, it becomes clear
at once that considerable preparations are necessary to carry out the
expedition. Many preliminary activities are intimately associated with
the Kula. Such are, particularly, the building of canoes, preparation
of the outfit, the provisioning of the expedition, the fixing of dates
and social organisation of the enterprise. All these are subsidiary
to the Kula, and as they are carried on in pursuit of it, and form one
connected series, a description of the Kula must embrace an account of
these preliminary activities. The detailed account of canoe building,
of the ceremonial attached to it, of the incidental magical rites,
of the launching and trial run, of the associated customs which aim
at preparing the outfit--all this will be described in detail in the
next few chapters.

Another important pursuit inextricably bound up with the Kula,
is that of the secondary trade. Voyaging to far-off countries,
endowed with natural resources unknown in their own homes, the Kula
sailors return each time richly laden with these, the spoils of
their enterprise. Again, in order to be able to offer presents to his
partner, every outward bound canoe carries a cargo of such things as
are known to be most desirable in the overseas district. Some of this
is given away in presents to the partners, but a good deal is carried
in order to pay for the objects desired at home. In certain cases,
the visiting natives exploit on their own account during the journey
some of the natural resources overseas. For example, the Sinaketans
dive for the spondylus in Sanaroa Lagoon, and the Dobuans fish in
the Trobriands on a beach on the southern end of the island. The
secondary trade is complicated still more by the fact that such big
Kula centres as, for instance, Sinaketa, are not efficient in any
of the industries of special value to the Dobuans. Thus, Sinaketans
have to procure the necessary store of goods from the inland villages
of Kuboma, and this they do on minor trading expeditions preliminary
to the Kula. Like the canoe-building, the secondary trading will be
described in detail later on, and has only to be mentioned here.

Here, however, these subsidiary and associated activities must be
put in proper relation with regard to one another and to the main
transaction. Both the canoe-building and the ordinary trade have
been spoken of as secondary or subsidiary to the Kula proper. This
requires a comment. I do not, by thus subordinating the two things
in importance to the Kula, mean to express a philosophical reflection
or a personal opinion as to the relative value of these pursuits from
the point of view of some social teleology. Indeed, it is clear that
if we look at the acts from the outside, as comparative sociologists,
and gauge their real utility, trade and canoe-building will appear
to us as the really important achievements, whereas we shall regard
the Kula only as an indirect stimulus, impelling the natives to sail
and to trade. Here, however, I am not dealing in sociological, but
in pure ethnographical description, and any sociological analysis I
have given is only what has been absolutely indispensable to clear
away misconceptions and to define terms. [40]

By ranging the Kula as the primary and chief activity, and the rest
as secondary ones, I mean that this precedence is implied in the
institutions themselves. By studying the behaviour of the natives and
all the customs in question, we see that the Kula is in all respects
the main aim: the dates are fixed, the preliminaries settled, the
expeditions arranged, the social organisation determined, not with
regard to trade, but with regard to Kula. On an expedition, the big
ceremonial feast, held at the start, refers to the Kula; the final
ceremony of reckoning and counting the spoil refers to Kula, not to
the objects of trade obtained. Finally, the magic, which is one of the
main factors of all the procedure, refers only to the Kula, and this
applies even to a part of the magic carried out over the canoe. Some
rites in the whole cycle are done for the sake of the canoe itself,
and others for the sake of Kula. The construction of the canoes is
always carried on directly in connection with a Kula expedition. All
this, of course, will become really clear and convincing only after
the detailed account is given. But it was necessary at this point to
set the right perspective in the relation between the main Kula and
the trade.

Of course not only many of the surrounding tribes who know nothing
of the Kula do build canoes and sail far and daringly on trading
expeditions, but even within the Kula ring, in the Trobriands for
instance, there are several villages who do not kula, yet have canoes
and carry on energetic overseas trade. But where the Kula is practised,
it governs all the other allied activities, and canoe building and
trade are made subsidiary to it. And this is expressed both by the
nature of the institutions and the working of all the arrangements
on the one hand, and by the behaviour and explicit statements of the
natives on the other.

The Kula--it becomes, I hope, more and more clear--is a big,
complicated institution, insignificant though its nucleus might
appear. To the natives, it represents one of the most vital interests
in life, and as such it has a ceremonial character and is surrounded by
magic. We can well imagine that articles of wealth might pass from hand
to hand without ceremony or ritual, but in the Kula they never do. Even
when at times only small parties in one or two canoes sail overseas
and bring back vaygu'a, certain taboos are observed, and a customary
course is taken in departing, in sailing, and in arriving; even the
smallest expedition in one canoe is a tribal event of some importance,
known and spoken of over the whole district. But the characteristic
expedition is one in which a considerable number of canoes take
part, organised in a certain manner, and forming one body. Feasts,
distributions of food, and other public ceremonies are held, there
is one leader and master of the expedition, and various rules are
adhered to, in addition to the ordinary Kula taboos and observances.

The ceremonial nature of the Kula is strictly bound up with another of
its aspects--magic. "The belief in the efficiency of magic dominates
the Kula, as it does ever so many other tribal activities of the
natives. Magical rites must be performed over the sea-going canoe when
it is built, in order to make it swift, steady and safe; also magic
is done over a canoe to make it lucky in the Kula. Another system of
magical rites is done in order to avert the dangers of sailing. The
third system of magic connected with overseas expeditions is the
mwasila or the Kula magic proper. This system consists in numerous
rites and spells, all of which act directly on the mind (nanola)
of one's partner, and make him soft, unsteady in mind, and eager to
give Kula gifts" (loc. cit., p. 100).

It is clear that an institution so closely associated with magical
and ceremonial elements, as is the Kula, not only rests on a firm,
traditional foundation, but also has its large store of legends. "There
is a rich mythology of the Kula, in which stories are told about
far-off times when mythical ancestors sailed on distant and daring
expeditions. Owing totheir magical knowledge they were able to escape
dangers, to conquer their enemies, to surmount obstacles, and by their
feats they established many a precedent which is now closely followed
by tribal custom. But their importance for their descendants lies
mainly in the fact that they handed on their magic, and this made
the Kula possible for the following generations" (loc. cit., p. 100).

The Kula is also associated in certain districts, to which the
Trobriands do not belong, with the mortuary feasts, called so'i. The
association is interesting and important, and in Chapter XX an account
of it will be given.

The big Kula expeditions are carried on by a great number of natives,
a whole district together. But the geographical limits, from which the
members of an expedition are recruited, are well defined. Glancing
at Map V, "we see a number of circles, each of which represents a
certain sociological unit which we shall call a Kula community. A
Kula community consists of a village or a number of villages, who go
out together on big overseas expeditions, and who act as a body in the
Kula transactions, perform their magic in common, have common leaders,
and have the same outer and inner social sphere, within which they
exchange their valuables. The Kula consists, therefore, first of the
small, internal transactions within a Kula community or contiguous
communities, and secondly, of the big over-seas expeditions in which
the exchange of articles takes place between two communities divided
by sea. In the first, there is a chronic, permanent trickling of
articles from one village to another, and even within the village. In
the second, a whole lot of valuables, amounting to over a thousand
articles at a time, are exchanged in one enormous transaction, or, more
correctly, in ever so many transactions taking place simultaneously"
(loc. cit., p. 101). "The Kula trade consists of a series of such
periodical overseas expeditions, which link together the various
island groups, and annually bring over big quantities of vaygu'a and
of subsidiary trade from one district to another. The trade is used
and used up, but the vaygu'a--the armshells and necklets--go round
and round the ring" (loc. cit., p. 105).

In this chapter, a short, summary definition of the Kula has been
given. I enumerated one after the other its most salient features,
the most remarkable rules as they are laid down in native custom,
belief and behaviour. This was necessary in order to give a general
idea of the institution before describing its working in detail. But no
abridged definition can give to the reader the full understanding of
a human social institution. It is necessary for this, to explain its
working concretely, to bring the reader into contact with the people,
show how they proceed at each successive stage, and to describe all
the actual manifestations of the general rules laid down in abstract.

As has been said above, the Kula exchange is carried on by enterprises
of two sorts; first there are the big overseas expeditions, in which
a more or less considerable amount of valuables are carried at one
time. Then there is the inland trade in which the articles are passed
from hand to hand, often changing several owners before they move a
few miles.

The big overseas expeditions are by far the more spectacular part
of the Kula. They also contain much more public ceremonial, magical
ritual, and customary usage. They require also, of course, more of
preparation and preliminary activity. I shall therefore have a good
deal more to say about the overseas Kula expeditions than about the
internal exchange.

As the Kula customs and beliefs have been mainly studied in Boyowa,
that is, the Trobriand Islands, and from the Boyowan point of view,
I shall describe, in the first place, the typical course of an
overseas expedition, as it is prepared, organised, and carried out
from the Trobriands. Beginning with the construction of the canoes,
proceeding to the ceremonial launching and the visits of formal
presentation of canoes, we shall choose then the community of Sinaketa,
and follow the natives on one of their overseas trips, describing it
in all details. This will serve us as a type of a Kula expedition to
distant lands. It will then be indicated in what particulars such
expeditions may differ in other branches of the Kula, and for this
purpose I shall describe an expedition from Dobu, and one between
Kiriwina and Kitava. An account of inland Kula in the Trobriands,
of some associated forms of trading and of Kula in the remaining
branches will complete the account.

In the next chapter I pass, therefore, to the preliminary stages of the
Kula, in the Trobriands, beginning with a description of the canoes.