both with reference to their economic position and to their
character. Monopolists they are in two respects, namely as
manufacturers of the wonderful clay pots which form the only supply for
the surrounding districts; and in the second place, as a commercial
community, situated half-way between the populous country of Dobu,
with its rich gardens and coco-nut plantations, on the one hand, and
the Trobriands, the main industrial community in Eastern New Guinea
on the other.

The expression 'monopolists' must, however, be correctly
understood. The Amphletts are not a centre of commercial middle-men,
constantly busy importing and exporting desirable utilities. Only
about once or twice a year, a big expedition comes to their Islands,
and every few months they themselves will sail South-East or North
and again receive visits from smaller expeditions from one of the
neighbours or the other. It is through just such small expeditions
that they collect a relatively considerable amount of utilities
from all surrounding districts, and these they can give to such
visitors as need and desire them. Nor would they impose high prices
on any such exchange, but they are certainly considered less liberal,
less ready to give or to trade and always on the look out for higher
return gifts and extras. In their bartering away of the clay pots,
they also cannot ask extortionate prices, such as, according to the
laws of supply and demand, they could impose on their neighbours. For,
no more than any other natives, can they run counter to customary
rules, which regulate this exchange as much as all others. Indeed,
considering the great amount of trouble which they have in obtaining
the clay, and the high degree of skill necessary to produce the pots,
the prices for which they sell them are very low. But here again,
their manners over this transaction are distinctly haughty, and they
are well aware of their value as potters and distributors of pots to
the other natives.

A few more words must be said about their pot making industry as well
as about the trade in these islands.

The natives of the Amphletts are exclusive manufacturers of pottery,
within a wide radius. They are the only purveyors to the Trobrianders,
to the inhabitants of the Marshall Bennett Islands, and also, I
believe, all the clay-pots in Woodlark come from the Amphletts. [72]
To the South, they export their pots to Dobu, Du'a'u, and further South
as far as Milne Bay. This is not all, however, for although in some of
these farther districts the Amphlett pots are used side by side with
other ones, they are infinitely superior to any earthenware found in
the whole of British New Guinea. Of a large size, yet extremely thin,
they possess great durability, and in form they are extremely well
shaped and finished (see Plate XLVI).

The best Amphlett pots owe their high quality to the excellence
of their material as well as their workmanship. The clay for them
has to be imported into the Islands from Yayawana, a quarry on the
Northern shore of Fergusson Island, about a day's journey from the
Amphletts. Only a very inferior clay can be found in the islands of
Gumasila and Nabwageta, good enough to make small pots, but quite
useless for the big ones.

There is a legend, explaining why the good clay cannot be obtained
nowadays in the Amphletts. In olden days, two brothers, Torosipupu
and Tolikilaki, lived on one of the summits of Gumasila called
Tomonumonu. There was plenty of fine clay there at that time. One
day Torosipupu went to fish with a trap. He caught a very fine giant
clam-shell. When he came back, Tolikilaki said: "O my shell! I shall
eat it!" Torosipupu refused it and answered with a very obscene
allusion to the bivalvular mollusc and to the uses he was going
to make of it. Tolikilaki asked again; Torosipupu refused. They
quarrelled. Tolikilaki then took part of the clay with him, and went
to Yayawana on the main island. Torosipupu afterwards took the rest
and followed him. What were their further destinies, the legend does
not say. But on Gumasila there remained only very poor clay, which
is all that can be found there ever since.

Since then, the men have to go about twice yearly to Yayawana in order
to bring the clay from which the women afterwards will manufacture
the pots. It takes them about a day to reach Yayawana, to which, as
it lies to the South-West, they can travel with any of the prevailing
winds and return equally well. They remain for a couple of days there,
digging the clay, drying it and filling a few vataga baskets with it. I
estimate that each canoe carries about two ton weight on its return
journey. This will last the women for half a year's production. The
pale, straw-coloured clay is kept under the houses in big troughs
made of sides of discarded canoes.

In olden days, before the white man's advent, the conditions were a
little more complicated. Only one island, Kwatouto, being on friendly
terms with the natives had the freedom of the Northern shore. Whether
the other islands used also to fetch the clay from there, doing so
armed and ready for attack; or whether they used to acquire the clay by
barter from Kwatouto, I could not definitely establish. The information
one receives in the Amphletts is exceedingly unsatisfactory, and my
several informants gave contradictory accounts on this point. The fact
seems clear, in my case, that Kwatouto, then as now, was the source
of the best pottery, but that both Gumasila and Nabwageta also always
manufactured pots, though perhaps inferior ones. The fourth island,
Domdom, never participated in this trade, and up to the present there
is not a single woman in Domdom who can shape a pot.

The manufacturing of this article, as said, is exclusively the work of
women. They sit in groups of two or three under the houses, surrounded
by big clumps of clay and the implements of their craft, and produce in
these very shabby and mean conditions, veritable masterpieces of their
art. Personally I had only the opportunity of seeing groups of very
old women at work, although I spent about a month in the Amphletts.

With regard to the technology of pot-making, the method is that
of first roughly moulding the clay into its form and then beating
with a spatula and subsequently scraping the walls to the required
thinness with a mussel-shell. To give the description in detail,
a woman starts first by kneading a certain amount of clay for a long
time. Of this material she makes two semi-circular clumps, or several
clumps, if a big pot is to be made. These clumps are then placed in a
ring, touching one another upon a flat stone or board, so that they
form a thick, circular roll (Plate XLIV, top). The woman now begins
to work this roll with both hands, gradually pressing it together,
and at the same time bringing it up all round into a slanting wall
(see Plate XLIV, bottom). Her left hand works as a rule on the inside,
and her right on the outside of this wall; gradually it begins to
shape into a semi-spherical dome. On the top of the dome there is a
hole, through which the woman thrusts her left hand, working with it
on the inside of the dome (see Plate XLV, top). At first the main
movements of her hands were from downward up, flattening out the
rolls into thin walls. The traces of her fingers going up and down
on the outside leave longitudinal furrows (see details on Plate XLV,
top). Towards the end of this stage her hands move round and round,
leaving concentric, horizontal marks on the dome. This is continued
until the pot has assumed a good curvature all round.

It seems almost a miracle to see how, in a relatively short time, out
of this after all brittle material, and with no implements whatever,
a woman will shape a practically faultless hemisphere, often up to
a metre in diameter.

After the required shape has been obtained the woman takes a small
spatula of light-wood into her right hand and she proceeds to tap
the clay gently (see Plate XLV, bottom). This stage lasts a fairly
long time, for big pots about an hour. After the dome has been
sufficiently worked in this way small pieces of clay are gradually
fitted in at the top, closing the orifice, and the top of the dome
is beaten again. In the case of small pots the beating is done only
after the orifice has been closed. The pot is put with the mat into
the sun, where it remains for a day or two to harden. It is then
turned round, so that its mouth is now uppermost, and its bottom is
carefully placed into a basket. Then, round the rim of the mouth, a
flat strip of clay is placed horizontally, turned towards the inside,
forming a graceful lip. Three small lumps of clay are put 120° distance
from each other near the lip as ornaments, and, with a pointed stick,
a design is scratched in round the lip and sometimes down the outside
of the body. In this state the pot is again left in the sun for some
length of time.

After it has sufficiently hardened to be handled with safety,
though it must be done with the utmost care, it is placed on some
dried sticks, mouth downwards, supported by stones put between
the sticks. It is surrounded with twigs and pieces of wood on its
outside, fire is kindled, the sticks below bake it from the inside,
and those from above on the outside. The final result is a beautiful
pot, of a brick red colour when new, though after several uses it
becomes completely black. Its shape is not quite semi-spherical;
it is rather half an ellipsoid, like the broader half of an egg,
cut off in the middle. The whole gives the feeling of perfection in
form and of elegance, unparalleled in any South Sea pottery I know
(see Plate XLVI).

These pots in Kiriwinian language kuria, are called by the Amphlett
natives kuyana or va'ega. The biggest specimens are about a metre
across their mouth, and some sixty centimetres deep; they are used
exclusively for the ceremonial cooking of mona (see Plate XXXV), and
are called kwoylamona (in the Amphletts: nokunu). The second size
kwoylakalagila (in the Amphletts, nopa'eva) are used for ordinary
boiling of yams or taro. Kwoylugwawaga (Amphletts, nobadala), are
used for the same purposes but are much smaller. An especial size,
kwoylamegwa (Amphletts, nosipoma) are used in sorcery. The smallest
ones, which I do not remember ever having seen in the Trobriands
though there is a Trobriand word for them, kwoylakekila, are used
for everyday cooking in the Amphletts where they are called va'ega,
in the narrower sense of the word.

I have expatiated on this singular and artistic achievement of the
natives of the Amphletts, because from all points of view it is
important to know the details of a craft so far in advance of any
similar achievement within the Melanesian region.

A few words must now be said about trade in the Amphletts. The central
position of this little archipelago situated between, on one side,
the big, flat, extremely fertile coral islands, which, however, are
deprived of many indispensable, natural resources; and on the other,
the rich jungle and varied mineral supplies of the volcanic regions in
the d'Entrecasteaux archipelago, indicates on which lines this trade
would be likely to develop. To this natural inequality between them
and their neighbours are added social elements. The Trobrianders are
skilful, industrious, and economically highly organised. In this
respect, even the Dobuans stand on a lower level, and the other
inhabitants of the d'Entrecasteaux much more so.

If we imagine a commercial diagram drawn on the map, we would first
of all notice the export in pottery, radiating from the Amphletts
as its source. In the inverse direction, flowing towards them,
would be imports in food such as sago, pigs, coco-nut, betel-nut,
taro and yams. An article very important in olden days, which had
to be imported into the Amphletts, was the stone for implements
coming via the Trobriands from Woodlark Island. These indeed would
be traded on by the Amphlettans, as all the d'Entrecasteaux relied,
for the most part at least, on the imports from Woodlark, according to
information I obtained in the Amphletts. The Amphlett islands further
depended on the Trobriands for the following articles: wooden dishes,
manufactured in Bwoytalu; lime-pots manufactured in several villages
of Kuboma; three-tiered baskets and folding baskets, made in Luya;
ebony lime pots and mussel shells, these latter fished mainly by the
village of Kavataria in the lagoon. These articles were paid for, or
matched as presents by the following ones: first of all, of course the
pots; secondly, turtle-shell earrings, special nose sticks, red ochre,
pumice stone and obsidian, all of these obtainable locally. Further,
the natives of the Amphletts procured on Fergusson Island, for the
Trobrianders, wild banana seeds used for necklaces, strips of rattan
used as belts and for lashing, feathers of the cassowary and red
parrot, used for dancing decorations, plaited fibre-belts, bamboo
and barbed spears.

It may be added that in olden days, the natives in the Amphletts
would not sail freely to all the places on the main island. Each
Amphlett village community had a district on the mainland, with
which they were on friendly terms and with which they could trade
without incurring any danger. Thus, as said above, only the village
of Kwatouto, in the southernmost inhabited Amphlett island, was free
to go unmolested to the district round Yayawana, from whence they
obtained the pale yellow clay, so excellent for pottery. The natives
of Nabwageta had a few villages eastwards from Yayawana to deal
with, and those of Gumasila went further East still. Domdom natives
were never great traders or sailors. The trading conditions in the
islands were further complicated by the constant internal quarrels and
warfare between the districts. Kwatouto and Domdom on the one side,
Gumasila and Nabwageta on the other were allies, and between these
two factions there was a constant, smouldering hostility, preventing
any development of friendly commercial intercourse, and breaking out
now and then into open warfare. This was the reason why the villages
were all perched on high, inaccessible ledges, or like Gumasila,
were built so as to be protected by the sea and reefs from attack.

The influence of the surrounding great districts, that is, of the
Trobriands and of Dobu upon the Amphletts neither was nor is merely
commercial. From the limited linguistic material collected in the
Amphletts, I can only say that their language is related both to that
of the Trobriands and of Dobu. Their social organisation resembles
closely that of the Trobrianders with the exception of chieftainship,
which is lacking in the Amphletts. In their beliefs as to sorcery,
spirits, etc., they seem to be more akin to the Dobuans than to the
Trobrianders. Their canoe magic has come from the Trobriands, but the
art of building their canoes is that of Dobu, which as we have seen
before is also the one adopted by the Trobrianders. The magic of the
Kula, known in the Amphletts, is partly adopted from the Trobriands,
and partly from Dobu. There is only one indigenous system of magic
which originated in the islands. Long ago there lived a man of the
Malasi clan, who had his abode in the rock of Selawaya, which stands
out of the jungle, above the big village of Gumasila. This man knew
the magic of ayowa, which is the name given to mwasila (Kula magic)
in the language of the Amphletts and of Dobu. Some people passed
near the stone while it was being recited within it; they learned it,
and handed it over to their descendants.




IV

One more point of importance must be mentioned here, a point
bearing upon the intertribal relations in this district. As we saw,
some Trobriand people remain sometimes on prolonged visits in the
Amphletts. This custom, however, is never reciprocated, and people
from the Amphletts never visit for any length of time their Northern
neighbours. The same refers to the relations between the Trobriands
and the district of Dobu. In discussing the lists of Kula partners
of Kouta'uya and Toybayoba, I was told about some of their Southern
partners, that they were veyola (maternal kinsmen) of my informant. On
further inquiry it appeared that these people were emigrants from
the Trobriands, who settled down in Tewara, Sanaroa or the big Dobuan
settlements on the North-West shores of Dawson Straits.

When I asked whether, on the contrary, there were any cases of Dobuans
settling in Boyowa, it was emphatically denied that such a thing
could happen. And indeed, in the numerous genealogical data which
I have collected from all over the district, there is no trace of
migration from the South, although frequent migrations occur within
the district and some from the Marshall Bennett Islands. In general,
all these migrations within the Trobriands show also a marked tendency
to move form North to South. Thus, the most aristocratic sub-clan,
the Tabalu, originated in the Northernmost village of Laba'i. But now
their stronghold is further South in Omarakana, and the members of
the same sub-clan are ruling in Olivilevi, and Tukwa'ukwa, that is in
the middle of the island. Some of them even migrated as far South as
Vakuta, where they established a feeble imitation of chieftainship,
never being able to subdue the other natives to any extent. Several
sub-clans, now firmly established in the Middle and Southern portions
of the island, trace their descent from the North, and in the Amphletts
there are also a couple of cases of sub-clans immigrated from Boyowa.

In contrast to this migration of people from North to South, we have
noted the spread of one of the main cultural elements, of the canoe,
from South to North. We saw how the nagega, the big, sea-worthy,
but heavy and slow canoe has been superseded by the masawa or tadobu,
which spread a few generations ago, till it arrived at the island of
Kitava. It is more difficult to follow the movements of beliefs. But
I have reason to assume that beliefs in sorcery, more especially in
the mulukwausi and tauva'u, move from South to North.

In the next Chapter, we shall return to our Sinaketan expedition,
in order to move them for a short distance along their route into
the first settlements of the Dobu speaking people. These places will
suggest a new theme for a lengthy digression, this time into the
mythological subjects and legends connected with the Kula.