MAGIC AND THE KULA


I

In treating of the various customs and practices of the Kula, I had
at every step to enter into the description of magical rites and into
the analysis of spells. This had to be done, first of all, because
magic looms paramount in the natives' view of the Kula. Again, all
magical formulæ disclose essentials of belief and illustrate typical
ideas in a manner so thorough and telling that no other road could
lead us as straight into the inner mind of the native. Finally, there
is a direct, ethnographic interest in knowing the details of magical
performance, which has such an overweening influence over tribal life,
and enters so deeply into the make-up of the natives' mentality.

It is now necessary to complete our knowledge of magic and to focus
all the dispersed data into one coherent picture. So far, the many
scattered references and numerous concrete details have not furnished
a general idea, of what magic means to the natives; how they imagine
the working of the magical forces; what are their implied and expressed
views on the nature of magical power. Collecting all the material which
has already been presented in the previous chapters, and supplementing
it with native and ethnographic comments, we shall be able to arrive
at a certain synthesis, respecting the Kiriwinian theory of magic.

All the data which have been so far mustered disclose the extreme
importance of magic in the Kula. But if it were a question of treating
of any other aspect of the tribal life of these natives, it would also
be found that, whenever they approach any concern of vital importance,
they summon magic to their aid. It can be said without exaggeration
that magic, according to their ideas, governs human destinies; that
it supplies man with the power of mastering the forces of nature; and
that it is his weapon and armour against the many dangers which crowd
in upon him on every side. Thus, in what is most essential to man,
that is in his health and bodily welfare, he is but a plaything of the
powers of sorcery, of evil spirits and of certain beings, controlled
by black magic. Death in almost all its forms is the result of one of
these agencies. Permanent ill-health and all kinds of acute sickness,
in fact everything, except such easily explainable ailments as physical
overstrain or slight colds, are attributed to magic. I have spoken
(Chapter II) of the several ways in which the evil powers bring
disease and death. The tauva'u, who bring epidemics and the tokway,
who inflict shooting pains and minor ailments, are the only examples
of non-human beings' exerting any direct influence on human destinies,
and even the members of this restricted pantheon of demonology only
occasionally descend among the mortals to put into action their
potential powers. By far the deepest dread and most constant concern
of the natives are with the bwaga'u, the entirely human sorcerers, who
carry out their work exclusively by means of magic. Second to them in
the quantity of magical output and in the frequency of their exploits,
are the mulukwausi, the flying witches, which have been described in
detail in Chapter XI. They are a good example of how every belief in
a superior power is at the bottom a belief in magic. Magic gives to
these beings the capacity to destroy human life and to command other
agents of destruction. Magic also gives man the power and the means to
defend himself, and if properly applied, to frustrate all the nefarious
attempts of the mulukwausi. Comparing the two agencies, it may be said
that in every-day life, the sorcerer is by far the most feared and is
most frequently believed to be at work; while the mulukwausi enter
upon the scene at certain dramatic moments, such as the presence of
death, a catastrophe on land, and more especially at sea; but then,
they enter with even deadlier weapons than the bwaga'u. Health,
the normal state of human beings can, if once lost, be regained by
magic and by magic only. There is no such thing as natural recovery,
return to health being always due to the removal of the evil magic
by means of magical counter-action.

All those crises of life, which are associated with fear of danger,
with the awakening of passions or of strong emotions, have also their
magical accompaniment. The birth of a child is always ushered in
by magic, in order to make the child prosper, and to neutralise the
dangers and evil influences. There is no rite or magic at puberty;
but then, with this people, puberty does not present any very definite
crisis in the life of the individual, as their sexual life starts
long before puberty arrives, and gradually shapes and develops
as the organism matures. The passion of love, however, has a very
elaborate magical counterpart, embodied in many rites and formulæ,
to which a great importance is attached, and all success in sexual
life is ascribed to it. The evil results of illicit love--that is love
within the clan, which, by the way, is considered by these natives
as the main class of sexual immorality--can also be counteracted by
a special type of magic.

The main social interests, ambition in gardening, ambition in
successful Kula, vanity and display of personal charms in dancing--all
find their expression in magic. There is a form of beauty magic,
performed ceremonially over the dancers, and there is also a kind of
safety magic at dances, whose object is to prevent the evil magic of
envious sorcerers. Particular garden magic, performed by an individual
over his crops and seeds, as well as the evil magic which he casts on
the gardens of his rivals, express the private ambitions in gardening,
as contrasted with the interests of the whole village, which are
catered for by communal garden magic.

Natural forces of great importance to man, such as rain and sunshine,
the appropriate alternative operation of which makes his crops thrive;
or wind, which must be controlled for purposes of sailing and fishing,
are also governed by magic. The magic of rain and sunshine can be used
for good, as well as for nefarious purposes, and in this they have a
special interest in the Trobriands, because the most powerful system
of this magic is in the hands of the paramount chiefs of Kiriwina. By
bringing about a prolonged drought, the chiefs of Omarakana have
always been able to express their general displeasure with their
subjects, and thus enhance their wholesale power, independently of
any other mechanism, which they might have used for forcing their
will on private individuals or on whole communities.

The basic, food-providing economic activities, which in the Trobriands
are mainly gardening and fishing, are also completely magic-ridden. The
success of these pursuits is of course largely due to luck, chance or
accident, and to the natives they require supernatural assistance. We
had examples of economic magic in describing the construction of a
canoe, and the fishing for kaloma shell. The communal garden-magic
and the fishing magic of certain village communities show to a higher
degree even than the cases described, the feature which we found so
distinct in canoe magic, namely: that the rites and formulæ are not
a mere appendage, running side by side with economic efforts, without
exercising any influence over these. On the contrary, it may be said
that a belief in magic is one of the main, psychological forces which
allow for organisation and systemisation of economic effort in the
Trobriands. [80] The capacity for art, as well as the inspiration in
it, is also ascribed to the influence of magic.

The passions of hatred, envy, and jealousy, besides finding their
expression in the all powerful sorcery of the bwaga'u and mulukwausi,
are also responsible for many forms of witchery, known by the generic
term of bulubwalata. The classical forms of this magic have as their
object the estrangement of the affections of a wife or a sweetheart,
or the destruction of the domestic attachment of a pig. The pig is
sent away into the bush, having been made to take a dislike to its
master and to its domestic habits; the wife, though the spells used
to estrange her are slightly different, can be made also to take a
dislike to her domestic life, abandon her husband and return to her
parents. There is a bulubwalata of gardens, of canoes, of Kula, of
kaloma, in fact of everything, and a good deal of beneficial magic
is taken up with exorcising the results of bulubwalata.

The list of magic is not quite exhausted yet. There is the magic
of conditional curses, performed in order to guard property from
possible harm, inflicted by others; there is war-magic; there is
magic associated with taboos put on coco-nuts and betel-nuts, in order
to make them grow and multiply; there is magic to avert thunder and
resuscitate people who are struck by lightning; there is the magic
of tooth-ache, and a magic to make food last a long time.

All this shows the wide diffusion of magic, its extreme importance and
also the fact that it is always strongest there, where vital interests
are concerned; where violent passions or emotions are awakened; when
mysterious forces are opposed to man's endeavours; and when he has
to recognise that there is something which eludes his most careful
calculations, his most conscientious preparations and efforts.




II

Let us now proceed to formulate some short statement of the essential
conception of magic, as it is entertained by the natives. All statement
of belief, found among human beings so widely different from us, is
full of difficulties and pitfalls, which perhaps beset us most there,
where we try to arrive at the very foundation of the belief--that is,
at the most general ideas which underlie a series of practices and a
body of traditions. In dealing with a native community at the stage
of development which we find in the Trobriands, we cannot expect to
obtain a definite, precise and abstract statement from a philosopher,
belonging to the community itself. The native takes his fundamental
assumptions for granted, and if he reasons or inquires into matters
of belief, it would be always only as regards details and concrete
applications. Any attempts on the part of the Ethnographer to induce
his informant to formulate such a general statement would have to
be in the form of leading questions of the worst type because in
these leading questions he would have to introduce words and concepts
essentially foreign to the native. Once the informant grasped their
meaning, his outlook would be warped by our own ideas having been
poured into it. Thus the Ethnographer must draw the generalisation
for himself, must formulate the abstract statement without the direct
help of a native informant.

I am saying direct help because the generalisation must be entirely
based on indirect data supplied by the natives. In the course of
collecting information, of discussing formulæ and translating their
text, a considerable number of opinions on matters of detail will be
set forth by the natives. Such spontaneous opinions, if placed in a
correctly constructed mosaic, might almost of themselves give us a
true picture, might almost cover the whole field of native belief. And
then our task would only be to summarise this picture in an abstract
formula.

The Ethnographer, however, possesses an even better supply of evidence
from which to draw his conclusions. The objective items of culture,
into which belief has crystallised in the form of tradition, myth,
spell and rite are the most important source of knowledge. In them,
we can face the same realities of belief as the native faces in his
intimate intercourse with the magical, the same realities which
he not only professes with his tongue, but lives through partly
in imagination and partly in actual experience. An analysis of the
contents of the spells, the study of the manner in which they are
uttered; in which the concomitant rites are performed; the study of
the natives' behaviour, of the actors as well as of the spectators;
the knowledge of the social position and social functions, of the
magical expert--all this reveals to us, not only the bare structure of
their ideas on magic, but also the associated sentiments and emotions,
and the nature of magic as a social force.

An Ethnographer who, from the study of such objective data, has
been able to penetrate into the natives' attitude, to formulate a
general theory of magic, can then test his conclusions by direct
questionings. For he will be already in a position to use native
terminology and to move along the lines of native thought, and
in his questionings he will be able to accept the lead of his
informant instead of misleading the latter and himself by leading
questions. More especially in obtaining opinions of actual occurrences
from the natives, he will not have to move in abstract generalities,
but will be able to translate them into concrete applications and
into the native modes of thought.

In arriving at such general conclusions about vast aspects of primitive
human thought and custom, the Ethnographer's is a creative work,
in so far as he brings to light phenomena of human nature which,
in their entirety, had remained hidden even from those in whom they
happened. It is creative in the same sense as is the construction of
general principles of natural science, where objective laws of very
wide application lie hidden till brought forth by the investigating
human mind. In the same sense, however, as the principles of natural
science are empirical, so are also the final generalisations of
ethnographic sociology because, though expressly stated for the first
time by the investigator, they are none the less objective realities
of human thinking, feeling and behaviour.




III

We can start from the question of how the natives imagine their
magic to have originated. If we would ask even the most intelligent
informant some such concretely framed questions as: "Where has your
magic been made? How do you imagine its invention?"--they would
necessarily remain unanswered. Not even a warped and half-suggested
reply would be forthcoming. Yet there is an answer to this question,
or rather to its generalised equivalent. Examining the mythology of
one form of magic after the other, we find that there are in every
one either explicitly stated or implied views about how magic has
become known to man. As we register these views, compare them, and
arrive at a generalisation, we easily see, why our imaginary question,
put to the natives, would have to remain unanswered. For, according to
native belief, embedded in all traditions and all institutions, magic
is never conceived as having been made or invented. Magic has been
handed on as a thing which has always been there. It is conceived as an
intrinsic ingredient of everything that vitally affects man. The words,
by which a magician exercises his power over a thing or a process,
are believed to be co-existent with them. The magical formula and
its subject matter were born together.

In some cases, tradition represents them literally as being 'born'
by the same woman. Thus, rain was brought forth by a woman of
Kasana'i, and the magic came with it, and has been handed on ever
since in this woman's sub-clan. Again, the mythical mother of the
Kultur-hero Tudava gave birth, among other plants and animals, also
to the kalala fish. The magic of this fish is also due to her. In
the short myth about the origin of kayga'u magic--the one to protect
drowning sailors from witches and other dangers--we saw that the
mother, who gave birth to the Tokulubweydoga dog, also handed the
magic over to him. In all these cases, however, the myth does not
point to these women's inventing or composing the magic; indeed, it
is explicitly stated by some natives that the women had learned the
magic from their matrilineal ancestors. In the last case, the woman
is said in the myth to have known the magic by tradition.

Other myths are more rudimentary, yet, though less circumstantial
about the origin of the magic, show us just as unmistakably that
magic is a primeval thing, indeed, in the literal sense of the word,
autochthonous. Thus, the Kula magic in Gumasila came out of the rock
of Selawaya; the canoe magic out of the hole in the ground, brought
by the men, who originally emerged with it; garden magic is always
conceived as being carried from underground by the first ancestors,
who emerged out of the original hole of that locality. Several minor
forms of magic of local currency, such as fish magic, practised
in one village only, wind magic, etc., are also imagined to have
been carried out of the ground. All the forms of sorcery have been
handed over to people by non-human beings, who passed them on but
did not create them. The bwaga'u sorcery is due to a crab, who gave
it to a mythical personage, in whose dala (sub-clan) the magic was
carried on and from it distributed all over the islands. The tokway
(wood-sprites) have taught man certain forms of evil magic. There are
no myths in Kiriwina about the origin of flying witch magic. From other
districts, however, I have obtained rudimentary information pointing
to the fact that they were instructed in this magic by a mythical,
malevolent being called Taukuripokapoka, with whom even now some sort
of relations are kept up, culminating in nocturnal meetings and sexual
orgies which remind one very strongly of the Walpurgisnacht.

Love magic, the magic of thunder and lightning, are accounted for by
definite events. But in neither of them are we led to imagine that the
formula is invented, in fact, there is a sort of petitio principii in
all these myths, for on the one hand they set out to account for how
magic came, and on the other, in all of them magic is represented as
being there, ready made. But the petitio principii is due only to a
false attitude of mind with which we approach these tales. Because,
to the native mind, they set out to tell, not how magic originated,
but how magic was brought within the reach of one or other of the
Boyowan local groups or sub-clans.

Thus it may be said, in formulating a generalisation from all these
data, that magic is never invented. In olden days, when mythical
things happened, magic came from underground, or was given to a
man by some non-human being, or was handed on to descendants by the
original ancestress, who also brought forth the phenomenon governed by
the magic. In actual cases of the present times and of the near-past
generations whom the natives of to-day knew personally, the magic is
given by one man to another, as a rule by the father to his son or by
the maternal kinsman. But its very essence is the impossibility of
its being manufactured or invented by man, its complete resistance
to any change or modification by him. It has existed ever since the
beginning of things; it creates, but is never created; it modifies,
but must never be modified.

It is now easy to see that no questions about the origins of magic,
such as we formulated before, could have been asked of a native
informant without distorting the evidence in the very act of
questioning, while more general and quite abstract and colourless
inquiries cannot be made intelligible to him. He has grown up into a
world where certain processes, certain activities have their magic,
which is as much an attribute of theirs' as anything else. Some
people have been traditionally instructed how this magic runs, and
they know it; how men came by magic is told in numerous mythical
narratives. That is the correct statement of the native point of
view. Once arrived at this conclusion inductively, we can of course,
test our conclusions by direct questions, or by a leading question,
for the matter of that. To the question: "where human beings found
magic?" I obtained the following answer:--


    "All magic, they found long ago in the nether world. We do not
    find ever a spell in a dream; should we say so, this would be a
    lie. The spirits never give us a spell. Songs and dances they do
    give us, that is true, but no magic."


This statement, expressing the belief in a very clear and direct
manner, I had confirmed, reiterated with variations and amplifications,
by ever so many informants. They all emphasise the fact that magic
has its roots in tradition, that it is the most immutable and most
valuable traditional item, that it cannot leak into human knowledge
by any present human intercourse with spirits or with any non-human
beings such as the tokway or tauva'u. The property of having been
received from previous generations is so marked that any breach of
continuity in this succession cannot be imagined, and any addition
by an actual human being would make the magic spurious.

At the same time, magic is conceived as something essentially human. It
is not a force of nature, captured by man through some means and put
to his service; it is essentially the assertion of man's intrinsic
power over nature. In saying that, I, of course translate native
belief into abstract terms, which they would not use themselves for
its expression. None the less it is embodied in all their items of
folk-lore and ways of using magic and thinking about it. In all the
traditions, we find that magic is always in possession of man, or at
least of anthropomorphic beings. It is carried out from underground
by man. It is not conceived as having been there somewhere outside
his knowledge and then captured. On the contrary, as we saw, often
the very things which are governed by magic have been brought forth
by man, as for instance rain, the kalala fish; or disease, created
by the anthropomorphic crab.

The close sociological association of magic with a given sub-clan
emphasises this anthropocentric conception of magic. In the majority
of cases indeed, magic refers to human activities or to the response of
nature to human activities, rather than to natural forces alone. Thus,
in gardening and in fishing, it is the behaviour of plants and animals
tended or pursued by man; in the canoe magic, in the carver's magic,
the object is a human-made thing; in the Kula, in love magic, in
many forms of food magic, it is human nature on to which the force
is directed. Disease is not conceived as an extraneous force, coming
from outside and settling on the man, it is directly a man-made,
sorcerer-made something. We may, therefore, amplify the above given
definition, and say that magic is a traditionally handed on power of
man over his own creations, over things once brought forth by man,
or over responses of nature to his activities.

There is one more important aspect of the question of which I have
spoken already--the relation of magic to myth. It has been stated
in Chapter XII, that myth moves in the realm of the supernatural, or
better, super-normal, and that magic bridges over the gap between that
and present-day reality. Now this statement acquires a new importance;
magic appears to us as the essence of traditional continuity with
ancestral times. Not only, as I have emphasised in this chapter,
is it never conceived as a new invention, but it is identical in
its nature with the supernatural power which forms the atmosphere
of mythical events. Some of this power may have been lost on its
way down to our times--mythical stories relate how it has been lost;
but never has anything been added to it. There is nothing in it now
which has not been in it in the ancient, hoary times of myth. In
this the natives have a definitely regressive view of the relation
between now and before; in this they have their counterpart to a
Golden Age, and to a Garden of Eden of sorts. Thus we fall back upon
the recognition of the same truth, whether we approach the matter by
looking for beginnings of magic, or by studying the relations between
the present and the mythical reality. Magic is a thing never invented
and never tampered with, by man or any other agency.

This, of course, means that it is so in native belief. It hardly needs
explicitly stating that in reality magic must constantly change. The
memory of men is not such, that it could hand over verbally exactly
what it had received, and, like any other item of traditional lore, a
magical formula is in reality constantly being re-shaped as it passes
from one generation to another, and even within the mind of the same
man. As a matter of fact, even from the material collected by me in
the Trobriands, it can be unmistakably recognised that certain formulæ
are much older than others, and indeed, that some parts of spells,
and even some whole spells, are of recent invention. Here I cannot
do more than refer to this interesting subject, which, for its full
development, needs a good deal of linguistic analysis, as well as of
other forms of "higher criticism."

All these considerations have brought us very near to the essential
problem: what does magic really mean to the natives? So far, we have
seen that it is an inherent power of man over those things which
vitally affect him, a power always handed over through tradition. [81]
About the beginnings of magic they know as little, and are occupied
as little as about the beginnings of the world. Their myths describe
the origin of social institutions and the peopling of the world by
men. But the world is taken for granted, and so is the magic. They
ask no questions about magiogony any more than they do about cosmogony.




IV

So far we have not gone beyond the examination of myths and of what
we can learn from them about the nature of magic. To gain a deeper
insight into this subject, we must study more closely the concrete
data about magical performance. Even in the foregoing chapters a
sufficient material has been collected to allow of correct inferences,
and I shall only here and there have to allude to other forms of magic,
besides that of canoe, Kula and sailing.

I have spoken so far about "magic" in a wholesale manner, as if it
were all of one piece. As a matter of fact, magic all the world over,
however rudimentary or developed it might be, presents three essential
aspects. In its performance there enter always some words spoken or
chanted, some actions carried out, and there are always the minister
or ministers of the ceremony. In analysing the concrete details of
magical performances, therefore, we have to distinguish the formula,
the rite, and the condition of the performer.

These three factors stand out quite clearly and definitely in the
Trobriand magic, whether we examine the facts themselves or the
natives' way of looking at them. It may be said at once that in
this society the relative importance of the three factors is not
quite the same. The spell is by far the most important constituent
of magic. In their linguistic use, although these natives have a
special word, yopa, they very often use the word magic, megwa, to
describe a spell. The spell is the part of the magic which is kept
secret and known only to the esoteric circle of practitioners. When
a magic is handed over, whether by purchase, gift, or inheritance,
only the spell has to be taught to the new recipient, and as already
once said before, it is usually taught in instalments, while the
payment is received in that manner. When one speaks about magical
knowledge, or in inquiries whether an individual knows some magic,
this invariably refers to the formula, for the nature of the rite
is always quite public property. Even from the examples given in
this book, it can be seen how simple are the rites and how elaborate
often the formulæ. To direct questions on the subject, the natives
always reply that the spell is the more important part. The question:
"where is the real strength of magic?" would receive the reply:
"in the spell." The condition of the magician is, like the rite,
essential to the performance of the magic, but it also is considered
by the natives as subservient to the spell.

All this must be made clearer by the examination of actual facts. First
of all, let us examine the relation between spell and rite; and to
this purpose it will be best to group the various magical performances
into several classes according to the complexity of the concomitant
rite. We shall begin with the simplest rites.

Spells uttered directly without concomitant rite.--We had one or two
examples of such magic where the performer simply utters a formula
directly into space. For example, the communal magician of the kaloma
(spondylus shell) fishing performs the first act by walking on the
beach and reciting his spell towards the sea. In the moment of actual
shipwreck, before abandoning the canoe, the toliwaga launches his
last kayga'u directly into the elements. Again, he lets his voice
float over the waters, when invoking the marvellous fish, who will
bring the drowning party to some friendly shore. The final spell
of the Kula, by which the approaching canoe 'shakes the mountain,'
chanted by a trio of magical reciters, is thrown directly towards
the Koya. The clearing of the sea in the kaloma fishing is also done
this way, and many more examples could be adduced from garden magic,
wind magic, and other classes not described in this book.

The natives have a special expression for such acts; they say that
the formula is recited 'by the mouth only,' 'o wadola wala.' This
form of magic with such a rudimentary rite is, however, relatively
uncommon. Although one could say that there is no rite at all in such
cases, for the magician does not manipulate anything or perform any
action beyond speaking, yet from another point of view, the whole
performance is ritual in so far as he has always to cast his voice
towards the element, or being, which he addresses. Indeed here, as in
all other cases, the voice of the reciter has to be somehow or other
conveyed to the object which he wishes to becharm. We see, moreover,
that in all these instances, the nature of this object is such that
it can be directly reached by the voice, whilst on the other hand,
there would be some difficulty in applying any substance or performing
any action over, let us say, wind, or a shell growing on a distant
reef or the Koya (mountain).

Spells accompanied by simple rites of impregnation.--A large number
of the cases described in this book falls under this heading. We
saw quite at the beginning (Chapter V, Division II and III) how
the magician charms the blade of his adze, the ropes by which the
canoe had been pulled, the lashing creeper, the caulking, and the
paint of the canoe. Among the Kula rites, the initial magic over
the aromatic mint, over the lilava (magical bundle) over the gebobo
(central part of canoe); all the beauty magic on Sarubwoyna beach,
over coco-nuts, over the facial paints as well as the conch shell
magic, belong here. In all these performances an object is put well
within reach of the voice, and in an appropriate position. Often, the
object is placed within a receptacle or covering so that the voice
enters an enclosed space and is concentrated upon the substance to
be charmed. Thus, when the lilava is chanted over, the voice is cast
into the mats, which are afterwards carefully wrapped up. The aromatic
mint is charmed, lying at the bottom of a bag made of baked and thus
toughened banana leaf, which afterwards is carefully folded together
and bound with string. Again, the adze blade is first of all half
wrapped up in a banana leaf, and the voice enters the blade and the
inside of the leaf, which subsequently is folded over and tied over
the blade. In the magic of the conch shell, I drew attention to the
fact that immediately after the charm has been spoken, both holes of
the instrument are carefully stuffed up. In all cases where an object
is going to be used immediately, not so many precautions are taken,
but always, without any exception, the mouth is put quite close to the
object medicated (see Plate LVII) and wherever possible, this latter
is placed in some sort of cavity, such as a folded piece of leaf,
or even the two palms of the hand put together. All this shows that
it is essential to a correct performance of magic, that the voice
should be conveyed directly to the substance, if possible enclosed
and condensed round it, and then, imprisoned permanently there by
means of some wrapping. Thus, in this type of rite, the action serves
mainly to convey carefully and to retain the spell round the object.

It may be noted that in almost all cases described, the substance
harmed in the rite is not the final aim of the magic, but forms only a
constituent part of the object in view or is an accessory of it, or an
instrument used in its making. Thus the wayugo creeper, the kaybasi
(caulking), the paint, the prow-boards, all these are constituent
parts of the canoe, and the magic performed over them does not aim
at giving them any qualities, but aims at imparting swiftness and
lightness to the canoe of which they are parts only. Again, the herbs
and the colours of the coco-nut ointment medicated in the Kula are
accessories of the final end of this magic, that is, of the personal
beauty and attractiveness of the performer. The adze, the breaking
stone in kaloma magic are implements used in obtaining the object,
towards which the magic is directed. There are only a few instances
in which the simple rite of impregnation is directly perfo