followed after a lapse of time by a counter-gift. Now on a uvalaku
the natives would receive in Dobu a certain amount of gifts, which,
within a year or so, would be returned to the Dobuans, when these
pay a visit to Sinaketa. But there is always a considerable amount of
valuables which the Dobuans owe to the Sinaketans, so that when now the
Sinaketans go to Dobu, they will claim also these gifts due to them
from previous occasions. All these technicalities of Kula exchange
will become clearer in one of the subsequent chapters (Chapter XIV).
To sum up, the uvalaku is a ceremonial and competitive
expedition. Ceremonial it is, in so far as it is connected with
the special initial distribution of food, given by the master of
the uvalaku. It is also ceremonial in that all the formalities of
the Kula are kept rigorously and without exception, for in a sense
every Kula sailing expedition is ceremonial. Competitive it is mainly
in that at the end of it all the acquired articles are compared and
counted. With this also the prohibition to carry vaygu'a, is connected,
so as to give everyone an even start.
II
Returning now to the Sinaketan fleet assembled at Muwa, as soon as
they have arrived there, that is, some time about noon, they proceed
to the ceremonial distribution. Although the toli'uvalaku is master
of ceremonies, in this case he as a rule sits and watches the initial
proceedings from a distance. A group of his relatives or friends of
lesser rank busy themselves with the work. It might be better perhaps
here to give a more concrete account, since it is always difficult
to visualise exactly how such things will proceed.
This was brought home to me when in March, , I assisted at these
initial stages of the Kula in the Amphlett Islands. The natives had
been preparing for days for departure, and on the final date, I spent
the whole morning observing and photographing the loading and trimming
of the canoes, the farewells, and the setting out of the fleet. In the
evening, after a busy day, as it was a full-moon night, I went for a
long pull in a dinghy. Although in the Trobriands I had had accounts
of the custom of the first halt, yet it gave me a surprise when on
rounding a rocky point I came upon the whole crowd of Gumasila natives,
who had departed on the Kula that morning, sitting in full-moon light
on a beach, only a few miles from the village which they had left
with so much to-do some ten hours before. With the fairly strong
wind that day, I was thinking of them as camping at least half way
to the Trobriands, on one of the small sand banks some twenty miles
North. I went and sat for a moment among the morose and unfriendly
Amphlett Islanders, who, unlike the Trobrianders, distinctly resented
the inquisitive and blighting presence of an Ethnographer.
To return to our Sinaketan party, we can imagine the chiefs sitting
high up on the shore under the gnarled, broad-leafed branches of the
shady trees. They might perhaps be resting in one group, each with a
few attendants, or else every headman and chief near his own canoe,
To'udawada silently chewing betel-nut, with a heavy and bovine dignity,
the excitable Koutauya chattering in a high pitched voice with some of
his grown-up sons, among whom there are two or three of the finest men
in Sinaketa. Further on, with a smaller group of attendants, sits the
infamous Sinakadi, in conference with his successor to chieftainship,
his sister's son, Gomaya, also a notorious scoundrel. On such occasions
it is good form for chiefs not to busy themselves among the groups,
nor to survey the proceedings, but to keep an aloof and detached
attitude. In company with other notables, they discuss in the short,
jerky sentences which make native languages so difficult to follow,
the arrangements and prospects of the Kula, making now and then a
mythological reference, forecasting the weather, and discussing the
merits of the canoes.
In the meantime, the henchmen of the toli'uvalaku, his sons, his
younger brothers, his relatives-in-law, prepare the distribution. As
a rule, either To'udawada or Koutauya would be the toli'uvalaku. The
one who at the given time has more wealth on hand and prospects
of receiving more vaygu'a, would take over the dignity and the
burdens. Sinakadi is much less wealthy, and probably it would be an
exception for him and his predecessors and successors to play the
part. The minor headmen of the other compound villages of Sinaketa
would never fill the rôle.
Whoever is the master of the expedition for the time being will have
brought over a couple of pigs, which will now be laid on the beach and
admired by the members of the expedition. Soon some fires are lit,
and the pigs, with a long pole thrust through their tied feet, are
hung upside down over the fires. A dreadful squealing fills the air
and delights the hearers. After the pig has been singed to death, or
rather, into insensibility, it is taken off and cut open. Specialists
cut it into appropriate parts, ready for the distribution. Yams,
taro, coco-nuts and sugar cane have already been put into big heaps,
as many as there are canoes--that is, nowadays, eight. On these heaps,
some hands of ripe bananas and some betel-nut bunches are placed. On
the ground, beside them, on trays of plaited coco-nut leaves,
the lumps of meat are displayed. All this food has been provided
by the toli'uvalaku, who previously has received as contributions
towards it special presents, both from his own and from his wife's
kinsmen. In fact, if we try to draw out all the strands of gifts and
contributions connected with such a distribution we would find that
it is spun round into such an intricate web, that even the lengthy
account of the foregoing chapter does not quite do it justice.
After the chief's helpers have arranged the heaps, they go over them,
seeing that the apportionment is correct, shifting some of the food
here and there, and memorising to whom each heap will be given. Often
in the final round, the toli'uvalaku inspects the heaps himself,
and then returns to his former seat. Then comes the culminating act
of the distribution. One of the chief's henchmen, always a man of
inferior rank, accompanied by the chief's helpers, walks down the
row of heaps, and at each of them screams out in a very loud voice:
"O, Siyagana, thy heap, there, O Siyagana, O!" At the next one he
calls the name of another canoe: "O Gumawora, thy heap, there! O
Gumawora O!"
He goes thus over all the heaps, allotting each one to a canoe. After
that is finished, some of the younger boys of each canoe go and fetch
their heap. This is brought to their fire, the meat is roasted, and
the yams, the sugar cane and betel-nut distributed among the crew, who
presently sit down and eat, each group by itself. We see that, although
the toli'uvalaku is responsible for the feast, and receives from the
natives all the credit for it, his active part in the proceedings is a
small one, and it is more nominal than real. On such occasions it would
perhaps be incorrect to call him 'master of ceremonies,' although he
assumes this rôle, as we shall see, on other occasions. Nevertheless,
for the natives, he is the centre of the proceedings. His people do
all the work there is to be done, and in certain cases he would be
referred to for a decision, on some question of etiquette.
After the meal is over, the natives rest, chew betel-nut and smoke,
looking across the water towards the setting sun--it is now probably
late in the afternoon--towards where, above the moored canoes, which
rock and splash in the shallows, there float the faint silhouettes
of the mountains. These are the distant Koya, the high hills in the
d'Entrecasteaux and Amphletts, to which the elder natives have often
already sailed, and of which the younger have heard so many times in
myth, tales and magical spells. Kula conversations will predominate on
such occasions, and names of distant partners, and personal names of
specially valuable vaygu'a will punctuate the conversation and make
it very obscure to those not initiated into the technicalities and
historical traditions of the Kula. Recollections how a certain big
spondylus necklace passed a couple of years ago through Sinaketa,
how So-and-so handed it to So-and-so in Kiriwina, who again gave it
to one of his partners in Kitava (all the personal names of course
being mentioned) and how it went from there to Woodlark Island, where
its traces become lost--such reminiscences lead to conjectures as
to where the necklace might now be, and whether there is a chance
of meeting it in Dobu. Famous exchanges are cited, quarrels over
Kula grievances, cases in which a man was killed by magic for his
too successful dealings in the Kula, are told one after the other,
and listened to with never failing interest. The younger men amuse
themselves perhaps with less serious discussions about the dangers
awaiting them on the sea, about the fierceness of the witches and
dreadful beings in the Koya, while many a young Trobriander would be
warned at this stage of the unaccommodating attitude of the women in
Dobu, and of the fierceness of their men folk.
After nightfall a number of small fires are lit on the beach. The stiff
pandanus mats, folded in the middle, are put over each sleeper so as
to form a small roof, and the whole crowd settle down for the night.
III
Next morning, if there is a fair wind, or a hope of it, the natives
are up very early, and all are feverishly active. Some fix up the
masts and rigging of the canoes, doing it much more thoroughly and
carefully than it was done on the previous morning, since there may
be a whole day's sailing ahead of them perhaps with a strong wind,
and under dangerous conditions. After all is done, the sails ready
to be hoisted, the various ropes put into good trim, all the members
of the crew sit at their posts, and each canoe waits some few yards
from the beach for its toliwaga (master of the canoe). He remains on
shore, in order to perform one of the several magical rites which,
at this stage of sailing, break through the purely matter-of-fact
events. All these rites of magic are directed towards the canoes,
making them speedy, seaworthy and safe. In the first rite, some leaves
are medicated by the toliwaga as he squats over them on the beach and
recites a formula. The wording of this indicates that it is a speed
magic, and this is also the explicit statement of the natives.
KADUMIYALA SPELL.
In this spell, the flying fish and the jumping gar fish are
invoked at the beginning. Then the toliwaga urges his canoe
to fly at its bows and at its stern. Then, in a long tapwana,
he repeats a word signifying the magical imparting of speed,
and with the names of the various parts of the canoe. The last
part runs: "The canoe flies, the canoe flies in the morning,
the canoe flies at sunrise, the canoe flies like a flying witch,"
ending up with the onomatopoetic words "Saydidi, tatata, numsa,"
which represent the flapping of pandanus streamers in the wind,
or as others say, the noises made by the flying witches, as they
move through the air on a stormy night.
After having uttered this spell into the leaves, the toliwaga gives
them to one of the usagelu (members of the crew), who, wading round
the waga, rubs with them first the dobwana, 'head' of the canoe, then
the middle of its body, and finally its u'ula (basis). Proceeding
round on the side of the outrigger, he rubs the 'head' again. It
may be remembered here that, with the native canoes, fore and aft
in the sailing sense are interchangeable, since the canoe must sail
having always the wind on its outrigger side, and it often has to
change stern to bows. But standing on a canoe so that the outrigger
is on the left hand, and the body of the canoe on the right, a native
will call the end of the canoe in front of him its head (dabwana),
and that behind, its basis (u'ula).
After this is over, the toliwaga enters the canoe, the sail is hoisted,
and the canoe rushes ahead. Now two or three pandanus streamers which
had previously been medicated in the village by the toliwaga are tied
to the rigging, and to the mast. The following is the spell which
had been said over them:
BISILA SPELL.
"Bora'i, Bora'i (a mythical name). Bora'i flies, it will fly;
Bora'i Bora'i, Bora'i stands up, it will stand up. In company
with Bora'i--sidididi. Break through your passage in Kadimwatu,
pierce through thy Promontory of Salamwa. Go and attach your
pandanus streamer in Salamwa, go and ascend the slope of Loma."
"Lift up the body of my canoe; its body is like floating gossamer,
its body is like dry banana leaf, its body is like fluff."
There is a definite association in the minds of the natives between
the pandanus streamers, with which they usually decorate mast, rigging
and sail, and the speed of the canoe. The decorative effect of the
floating strips of pale, glittering yellow is indeed wonderful,
when the speed of the canoe makes them flutter in the wind. Like
small banners of some stiff, golden fabric they envelope the sail
and rigging with light, colour and movement.
The pandanus streamers, and especially their trembling, are a definite
characteristic of Trobriand culture (see Plate XXIX). In some of their
dances, the natives use long, bleached ribbons of pandanus, which the
men hold in both hands, and set a-flutter while they dance. To do this
well is one of the main achievements of a brilliant artist. On many
festive occasions the bisila (pandanus streamers) are tied to houses
on poles for decoration. They are thrust into armlets and belts as
personal ornaments. The vaygu'a (valuables) when prepared for the Kula,
are decorated with strips of bisila. In the Kula a chief will send to
some distant partner a bisila streamer over which a special spell has
been recited, and this will make the partner eager to bestow valuables
on the sender. As we saw, a broad bisila streamer is attached to the
canoe of a toli'uvalaku as his badge of honour. The flying witches
(mulukwausi) are supposed to use pandanus streamers in order to
acquire speed and levitation in their nightly flights through the air.
After the magical pandanus strips have been tied to the rigging,
beside the non-magical, purely ornamental ones, the toliwaga sits at
the veva rope, the sheet by which the sail is extended to the wind,
and moving it to and fro he recites a spell.
KAYIKUNA VEVA SPELL.
Two verbs signifying magical influence are repeated with the
prefix bo---which implies the conception of 'ritual' or 'sacred'
or 'being tabooed.' [] Then the toliwaga says: "I shall treat
my canoe magically in its middle part, I shall treat it in its
body. I shall take my butia (flower wreath), of the sweet-scented
flowers. I shall put it on the head of my canoe."
Then a lengthy middle strophe is recited, in which all the parts
of a canoe are named with two verbs one after the other. The verbs
are: "To wreathe the canoe in a ritual manner," and "to paint
it red in a ritual manner." The prefix bo-, added to the verbs,
has been here translated, "in a ritual manner."[]
The spell ends by a conclusion similar to that of many other canoe
formulæ, "My canoe, thou art like a whirlwind, like a vanishing
shadow! Disappear in the distance, become like mist, avaunt!"
These are the three usual rites for the sake of speed at the beginning
of the journey. If the canoe remains slow, however, an auxiliary
rite is performed; a piece of dried banana leaf is put between the
gunwale and one of the inner frame sticks of the canoe, and a spell
is recited over it. After that, they beat both ends of the canoe
with this banana leaf. If the canoe is still heavy, and lags behind
the others, a piece of kuleya (cooked and stale yam) is put on a
mat, and the toliwaga medicates it with a spell which transfers the
heaviness to the yam. The spell here recited is the same one which
we met when the heavy log was being pulled into the village. The log
was then beaten with a bunch of grass, accompanied by the recital of
the spell, and then this bunch was thrown away. [] In this case
the piece of yam which has taken on the heaviness of the canoe is
thrown overboard. Sometimes, however, even this is of no avail. The
toliwaga then seats himself on the platform next to the steersman,
and utters a spell over a piece of coco-nut husk, which is thrown into
the water. This rite, called Bisiboda patile is a piece of evil-magic
(bulubwalata), intended to keep all the other canoes back. If that
does not help, the natives conclude that some taboos pertaining to
the canoe might have been broken, and perhaps the toliwaga may feel
some misgivings regarding the conduct of his wife or wives.