THE STORY OF SHIPWRECK


I

In this chapter an account will be given of the ideas and beliefs
associated with shipwreck, and of the various precautions which
the natives take to insure their own safety. We shall find here
a strange mixture of definite, matter of fact information, and of
fantastic superstitions. Taking a critical, ethnographic side view,
it may be said directly that the fanciful elements are intertwined
with the realities in such a manner, that it is difficult to make a
distinction between what is mere mytho-poetic fiction and what is
a customary rule of behaviour, drawn from actual experience. The
best way of presenting this material will be to give a consecutive
account of a shipwreck, as it is told in Kiriwinian villages by the
travelled old men to the younger generation. I shall adduce in it
the several magical formulæ, the rules of behaviour, the part played
by the miraculous fish, and the complex ritual of the saved party as
they flee from the pursuing mulukwausi.

These--the flying witches--will play such an important part in the
account, that I must begin with a detailed description of the various
beliefs referring to them, though the subject has been touched upon
once or twice before (Chapter II, Division VII, and other places). The
sea and sailing upon it are intimately associated in the mind of a
Boyowan with these women. They had to be mentioned in the description
of canoe magic, and we shall see what an important part they play
in the legends of canoe building. In his sailing, whether he goes to
Kitava or further East, or whether he travels South to the Amphletts
and Dobu, they form one of the main preoccupations of a Boyowan
sailor. For they are not only dangerous to him, but to a certain
extent, foreign. Boyowa, with the exception of Wawela and one or two
other villages on the Eastern coast, and in the South of the island,
is an ethnographic district, where the flying witches do not exist,
although they visit it from time to time. Whereas all the surrounding
tribes are full of women who practice this form of sorcery. Thus
sailing South, the Boyowan is travelling straight into the heart of
their domain.

These women have the power of making themselves invisible, and flying
at night through the air. The orthodox belief is that a woman who
is a yoyova can send forth a double which is invisible at will,
but may appear in the form of a flying fox or of a night bird or a
firefly. There is also a belief that a yoyova develops within her a
something, shaped like an egg, or like a young, unripe coco-nut. This
something is called as a matter of fact kapuwana, which is the word
for a small coco-nut. [67] This idea remains in the native's mind in
a vague, indefinite, undifferentiated form, and any attempt to elicit
a more detailed definition by asking him such questions, as to whether
the kapuwana is a material object or not, would be to smuggle our own
categories into his belief, where they do not exist. The kapuwana is
anyhow believed to be the something which in the nightly flights leaves
the body of the yoyova and assumes the various forms in which the
mulukwausi appears. Another variant of the belief about the yoyova is,
that those who know their magic especially well, can fly themselves,
bodily transporting themselves through the air.

But it can never be sufficiently emphasised that all these beliefs
cannot be treated as consistent pieces of knowledge; they flow into
one another, and even the same native probably holds several views
rationally inconsistent with one another. Even their terminology
(compare the last Division of the foregoing chapter), cannot be
taken as implying a strict distinction or definition. Thus, the word
yoyova is applied to the woman as we meet her in the village, and
the word mulukwausi will be used when we see something suspicious
flying through the air. But it would be incorrect to systematise
this use into a sort of doctrine and to say: "An individual woman
is conceived as consisting of an actual living personality called
yoyova, and of an immaterial, spiritual principle called mulukwausi,
which in its potential form is the kapuwana." In doing this we would
do much what the Mediæval Scholastics did to the living faith of
the early ages. The native feels and fears his belief rather than
formulates it clearly to himself. He uses terms and expressions, and
thus, as used by him, we must collect them as documents of belief,
but abstain from working them out into a consistent theory; for this
represents neither the native's mind nor any other form of reality.

As we remember from Chapter II, the flying witches are a nefarious
agency, second in importance to the bwaga'u (male sorcerer), but in
efficiency far more deadly even than he himself. In contrast to the
bwaga'u, who is simply a man in possession of a special form of magic,
the yoyova have to be gradually initiated into their status. Only a
small child, whose mother is a witch, can become a witch herself. When
a witch gives birth to a female child, she medicates a piece of
obsidian, and cuts off the navel string. The navel string is then
buried, with the recital of a magical formula, in the house, and not,
as is done in all ordinary cases, in the garden. Soon after, the witch
will carry her daughter to the sea beach, utter a spell over some brine
in a coco-nut cup, and give the child to drink. After that, the child
is submerged in water and washed, a kind of witch's baptism! Then
she brings back the baby into the house, utters a spell over a mat,
and folds her up in it. At night, she carries the baby through the
air, and goes to a trysting place of other yoyova, where she presents
her child ritually to them. In contrast to the usual custom of young
mothers of sleeping over a small fire, a sorceress lies with her baby
in the cold. As the child grows up, the mother will take it into her
arms and carry it through the air on her nightly rounds. Entering
girlhood at the age when the first grass skirt is put on a maiden,
the little prospective witch will begin to fly herself.

Another system of training, running side by side with flying, consists
in accustoming the child to participation in human flesh. Even before
the growing witch will begin to fly on her own account, the mother
will take her to the ghoulish repasts, where she and other witches
sit over a corpse, eating its eyes, tongue, lungs, and entrails. There
the little girl receives her first share of corpse flesh, and trains
her taste to like this diet.

There are other forms of training ascribed to mothers solicitous that
their daughters should grow up into efficient yoyova and mulukwausi. At
night the mother will stand on one side of the hut, with the child in
her hands, and throw the little one over the roof. Then quickly, with
the speed only possible to a yoyova, she will move round, and catch the
child on the other side. This happens before the child begins to fly,
and is meant to accustom it to passing rapidly through the air. Or
again, the child will be held by her feet, head down, and remain in
this position while the mother utters a spell. Thus gradually, by
all these means, the child acquires the powers and tastes of a yoyova.

It is easy to pick out such girls from other children. They will
be recognisable by their crude tastes, and more especially by their
habit of eating raw flesh of pigs or uncooked fish. And here we come
to a point, where mythical superstition plays over into something more
real, for I have been assured by reliable informants, and those not
only natives, that there are cases of girls who will show a craving
for raw meat, and when a pig is being quartered in the village will
drink its blood and tear up its flesh. These statements I never could
verify by direct observations, and they may be only the result of
very strong belief projecting its own realities, as we see on every
side in our own society in miraculous cures, spiritistic phenomena,
etc., etc. If, however, the eating of raw flesh by girl children
really occurs, this simply means that they play up to what they know
is said and believed about them. This again is a phenomenon of social
psychology met with in many phases of Trobriand society and in our own.

This does not mean that the character of a yoyova is publicly
donned. Indeed, though a man often owns up to the fact that he is
a bwaga'u, and treats his speciality quite openly in conversation,
a woman will never directly confess to being a yoyova, not even to
her own husband. But she will certainly be marked by everyone as such
a one, and she will often play up to the rôle, for it is always an
advantage to be supposed to be endowed with supernatural powers. And
moreover, being a sorceress is also a good source of income. A
woman will often receive presents with the understanding that such
and such a person has to be injured. She will openly take gifts,
avowedly in payment for healing someone who has been hurt by another
witch. Thus the character of a yoyova is, in a way, a public one,
and the most important and powerful witches will be enumerated by
name. But no woman will ever openly speak about being one. Of course
to have such a character would in no way spoil matrimonial chances,
or do anything but enhance the social status of a woman.

So deep is the belief in the efficacy of magic, and in magic being the
only means of acquiring extraordinary faculties, that all powers of a
yoyova are attributed to magic. As we saw in the training of a young
yoyova, magic has to be spoken at every stage in order to impart to
her the character of a witch. A full blown yoyova has to utter special
magic each time she wishes to be invisible, or when she wants to fly,
or acquire higher speed, or penetrate darkness and distance in order to
find out whether an accident is happening there. But like everything
referring to this form of witchcraft, these formulæ never come to
light. Although I was able to acquire a whole body of spells of the
bwaga'u sorcery, I could not even lift the fringe of the impenetrable
veil, surrounding the magic of the yoyova. As a matter of fact,
there is not the slightest doubt for me that not one single rite,
not one single word of this magic, have ever existed.

Once a mulukwausi is fully trained in her craft, she will often
go at night to feed on corpses or to destroy shipwrecked mariners,
for these are her two main pursuits. By a special sense, acquired
through magic, she can 'hear,' as the natives say, that a man has
died at such and such a place, or that a canoe is in danger. Even
a young apprenticed yoyova will have her hearing so sharpened that
she will tell her mother: "Mother, I hear, they cry!" Which means
that a man is dead or dying at some place. Or she will say: "Mother,
a waga is sinking!" And then they both will fly to the spot.

When she goes out on such an errand, the yoyova leaves her body
behind. Then she climbs a tree, and reciting some magic, she ties
a creeper to it. Then, she flies off, along this creeper, which
snaps behind her. This is the moment when we see the fire flying
through the sky. Whenever the natives see a falling star, they know
it is a mulukwausi on her flight. Another version is that, when a
mulukwausi recites a certain spell, a tree which stands somewhere
near her destination bends down towards the other tree on which she
is perched. She jumps from one top to the other, and it is then that
we see the fire. According to some versions, the mulukwausi, that is,
the witch in her flying state, moves about naked, leaving her skirt
round the body, which remains asleep in the hut. Other versions depict
her as tying her skirt tightly round her when flying, and beating her
buttocks with a magical pandanus streamer. These latter versions are
embodied in the magic quoted above in Chapter V.

Arrived at the place where lies the corpse, the mulukwausi, with others
who have also flown to the spot, perches on some high object, the top
of a tree or the gable of a hut. There they all wait till they can
feast on the corpse, and such is their greed and appetite that they
are also very dangerous to living men. People who collect round the
dead body to mourn and wake over it often have a special spell against
the mulukwausi recited over them, by the one who knows it. They are
careful not to stray away from the others, and, during burial of the
dead and afterwards, they believe the air to be infested with these
dangerous witches, who spread the smell of carrion around them.

The mulukwausi will eat out the eyes, the tongue, and the 'insides'
(lopoula) of the corpse; when they attack a living man they may
simply hit him or kick him, and then he becomes more or less sick. But
sometimes they get hold of an individual and treat him like a corpse
and eat some of his organs, and then the man dies. It is possible
to diagnose this, for such a person would quickly fail, losing his
speech, his vision, sometimes suddenly being bereft of all power of
movement. It is a less dangerous method to the living man when the
mulukwausi instead of eating his 'insides' on the spot, simply remove
them. They hide them in a place only known to themselves, in order
to have provision for a future feast. In that case there is some hope
for the victim. Another yoyova, summoned quickly by the relations of
the dying and well paid by them, will, in the form of a mulukwausi,
go forth, search for the missing organs, and, if she is fortunate
enough to find and restore them, save the life of the victim.

Kenoriya, the favourite daughter of To'ulawa, the chief of Omarakana,
while on a visit to another village, was deprived of her internal
organs by the mulukwausi. When brought home, she could neither move
nor speak, and lay down as if dead. Her mother and other relatives
already began their mortuary wailing over her, the chief himself
broke out into loud lamentations. But nevertheless, as a forlorn
hope, they sent for a woman from Wawela, a well-known yoyova, who
after receiving valuables and food, flew out as a mulukwausi, and the
very next night found Kenoriya's insides somewhere in the raybwag,
near the beach of Kaulukuba, and restored her to health.

Another authentic story is that of the daughter of a Greek trader
and a Kiriwinian woman from Oburaku. This story was told me by the
lady herself, in perfectly correct English, learnt in one of the
white settlements of New Guinea, where she had been brought up in
the house of a leading missionary. But the story was not spoilt by
any scepticism; it was told with perfect simplicity and conviction.

When she was a little girl, a woman called Sewawela, from the Island
of Kitava, but married to a man of Wawela, came to her parents'
house and wanted to sell a mat. They did not buy it, and gave her
only a little food, which, as she was a renowned yoyova and accustomed
therefore to deferential treatment, made her angry. When night came,
the little one was playing on the beach in front of the house, when
the parents saw a big firefly hovering about the child. The insect
then flew round the parents and went into the room. Seeing that
there was something strange about the firefly, they called the girl
and put her to bed at once. But she fell ill immediately, could not
sleep all night, and the parents, with many native attendants, had
to keep watch over her. Next morning, added the Kiriwinian mother,
who was listening to her daughter telling me the tale, the girl
"boge ikarige; kukula wala ipipisi," "she was dead already, but her
heart was still beating." All the women present broke out into the
ceremonial lamentations. The father of the girl's mother, however,
went to Wawela, and got hold of another yoyova, called Bomrimwari. She
took some herbs and smeared her own body all over. Then she went
out in the form of a mulukwausi in search of the girl's lopoulo
(inside). She searched about and found it in the hut of Sewawela,
where it lay on the shelf on which are kept the big clay-pots, in
which the mona (taro pudding), is cooked ceremonially. There it lay
"red as calico." Sewawela had left it there, while she went into the
garden with her husband, meaning to eat it on her return. Had this
happened, the girl could not have been saved. As soon as Bomrimwari
found it, she made some magic over it then and there. Then she came
back to the trader's compound, made some more magic over ginger-root,
and water, and caused the lopoulo to return to its place. After that,
the little girl soon got better. A substantial payment was given by
the parents to the yoyova for saving their child.

Living in Oburaku, a village on the Southern half of Boyowa, I was
on the boundary between the district where the yoyova do not exist,
and the other one, to the East, where they are plentiful. On the other
side of the Island, which is very narrow at this part, is the village
of Wawela, where almost every woman is reputed to be a witch, and some
are quite notorious. Going over the raybwag at night, the natives
of Oburaku would point out certain fireflies which would suddenly
disappear, not to relight again. These were the mulukwausi. Again,
at night, swarms of flying foxes used to flap over the tall trees,
making for the big, swampy Island of Boymapo'u which closes in the
Lagoon opposite the village. These too were mulukwausi, travelling
from the East, their real home. They also used to perch on the tops
of the trees growing on the water's edge, and this was therefore an
especially dangerous spot after sunset. I was often warned not to
sit there on the platforms of the beached canoes, as I liked to do,
watching the play of colours on the smooth, muddy waters, and on the
bright mangroves. When I fell ill soon after, everybody decided that
I had been 'kicked' by the mulukwausi, and some magic was performed
over me by my friend Molilakwa, the same who gave me some formulæ of
kayga'u, the magic spoken at sea against witches. In this case his
efforts were entirely successful, and my quick recovery was attributed
by the natives solely to the spells.




II

What interests us most about mulukwausi, is their association with
the sea and shipwreck. Very often they will roam over the sea, and
meet at a trysting place on a reef. There they will partake of a
special kind of coral, broken off from a reef, a kind called by the
natives nada. This whets their appetite for human flesh, exactly as
the drinking of salt water does with the bwaga'u. They have also some
indirect power over the elements in the sea. Although the natives
do not quite agree on the point, there is no doubt that a definite
connection exists between the mulukwausi and all the other dangers
which may be met in the sea, such as sharks, the 'gaping depth'
(ikapwagega wiwitu), many of the small sea animals, crabs, some of
the shells and the other things to be mentioned presently, all of
which are considered to be the cause of death of drowning men. Thus
the belief is quite definite that, in being cast into the water
by the shipwreck, men do not meet any real danger except by being
eaten by the mulukwausi, the sharks, and the other animals. If by the
proper magic these influences can be obviated, the drowning men will
escape unscathed. The belief in the omnipotence of man, or rather,
woman in this case, and of the equal power in antidoting by magic,
governs all the ideas of these natives about shipwreck. The supreme
remedy and insurance against any dangers lies in the magic of mist,
called kayga'u, which, side by side with Kula magic, and the magic
of the canoes, is the third of the indispensable magical equipments
of a sailor.

A man who knows well the kayga'u is considered to be able to travel
safely through the most dangerous seas. A renowned chief, Maniyuwa,
who was reputed as one of the greatest masters in kayga'u as well as
in other magic, died in Dobu on an expedition about two generations
ago. His son, Maradiana, had learnt his father's kayga'u. Although
the mulukwausi are extremely dangerous in the presence of a corpse,
and though the natives would never dream of putting a dead body on
a canoe, and thus multiplying the probabilities of an attack by the
witches, still, Maradiana, trusting to his kayga'u, brought the corpse
back to Boyowa without mishap. This act, a testimony to the daring
sailor's great prowess, and to the efficiency of the kayga'u magic,
is kept alive in the memory and tradition of the natives. One of my
informants, boasting of his kayga'u, told me how once, on a return
from Dobu, he performed his rites. Such a mist arose as a consequence
of it that the rest of the canoes lost their way, and arrived in the
island of Kayleula. Indeed, if we can speak of a belief being alive,
that is, of having a strong hold over human imagination, the belief
in the danger from mulukwausi at sea is emphatically such a one. In
times of mental stress, in times of the slightest danger at sea,
or when a dying or dead person is near, the natives at once respond
emotionally in terms of this belief. No one could live among these
natives, speaking their language, and following their tribal life,
without constantly coming up against the belief in mulukwausi, and
in the efficiency of the kayga'u.

As in all other magic, also here, there are various systems of kayga'u,
that is, there are various formulæ, slightly differing in their
expressions, though usually similar in their fundamental wordings
and in certain 'key' expressions. In each system, there are two main
types of spells, the giyotanawa, or the kayga'u of the Underneath,
and the giyorokaywa, or the kayga'u of the Above. The first one usually
consists of a short formula or formulæ spoken over some stones and some
lime in a lime pot and over some ginger root. This giyotanawa, as its
name indicates, is magic directed against the evil agencies, awaiting
the drowning men from below. Its spells close up 'the gaping depth' and
they screen off the shipwrecked men from the eyes of the sharks. They
also protect them from the other evil things, which cause the death of
a man in drowning. The several little sea worms found on the beach,
the crabs, the poisonous fish, soka, and the spiky fish, baiba'i,
as well as the jumping stones, whether vineylida or nu'akekepaki,
are all warded off and blinded by the giyotanawa. Perhaps the most
extraordinary belief in this connection is that the tokwalu, the
carved human figures on the prow boards, the guwaya, the semi-human
effigy on the mast top, as well as the canoe ribs would 'eat' the
drowning men if not magically 'treated.'

The kayga'u of the 'Above,' the giyorokaywa, consists of long spells,
recited over some ginger root, on several occasions before sailing,
and during bad weather or shipwreck. They are directed exclusively
against the mulukwausi, and form therefore the more important
class of the two. These spells must never be recited at night, as
then the mulukwausi could see and hear the man, and make his magic
inefficient. Again, the spell of the Above, when recited at sea,
must be spoken so that the magician is not covered with spray, for
if his mouth were wet with sea water, the smell would attract rather
than disperse, the flying witches. The man who knows the kayga'u must
also be very careful at meal times. Children may not speak, play about,
or make any noise while he eats, nor should anyone go round him behind
his back while he is thus engaged; normay they point out anything with
the finger. Should the man be thus disturbed during his food, he would
have to stop eating at once, and not resume it till the next meal time.

Now the leading idea of kayga'u is that it produces some sort of
mist. The mulukwausi who follow the canoe, the sharks and live stones
which lie in wait for it, the depth with all its horror, and the débris
of the canoe ready to harm the owner, all these are blinded by the mist
that arises in obedience to these spells. Thus the paralysing effect of
these two main forms of magic and the specialised sphere of influence
of each of them, are definite and clear dogmas of native belief.

But here again we must not try to press the interpretation of these
dogmas too far. Some sort of mist covers the eyes of all the evil
agencies or blinds them; it makes the natives invisible from them. But
to ask whether the kayga'u produces a real mist, visible also to
man, or only a supernatural one, visible only to the mulukwausi; or
whether it simply blinds their eyes so that they see nothing, would
be asking too much. The same native who will boast of having produced
a real mist, so great that it led astray his companions, will next
day perform the kayga'u in the village during a burial, and affirm
that the mulukwausi are in a mist, though obviously a perfectly clear
atmosphere surrounds the whole proceedings. The natives will tell how,
sailing on a windy but clear day, after a kayga'u has been recited
into the eye of the wind, they hear the shrieks of the mulukwausi,
who, losing their companions and the scent of the trail, hail one
another in the dark. Again, some expressions seem to represent the view
that it is mainly an action on the eyes of the witches. 'Idudubila
matala mulukwausi,'--'It darkens the eyes of the mulukwausi,' or
'iguyugwayu'--'It blinds,' the natives will say. And when asked:


    "What do the mulukwausi see, then?" they will answer: "They will
    see mist only. They do not see the places, they do not see the men,
    only mist."


Thus here, as in all cases of belief, there is a certain latitude,
within which the opinions and views may vary, and only the broad
outline, which surrounds them, is definitely fixed by tradition,
embodied in ritual, and expressed by the phraseology of magical
formulæ or by the statements of a myth.

I have thus defined the manner in which the natives face the dangers
of the sea; we have found, that the fundamental conceptions underlying
this attitude are, that in shipwreck, men are entirely in the hands
of the witches, and that from this, only their own magical defence
can save them. This defence consists in the rites and formulæ of the
kayga'u, of which we have also learnt the leading principles. Now, a
consecutive description must be given of how this magic is performed
when a toliwaga sets out on an expedition. And following up this
expedition, it must be told how the natives imagine a shipwreck,
and what they believe the behaviour of the shipwrecked party would be.




III

I shall give this narrative in a consecutive manner, as it was told
to me by some of the most experienced and renowned Trobriand sailors
in Sinaketa, Oburaku, and Omarakana. We can imagine that exactly
such a narrative would be told by a veteran toliwaga to his usagelu
on the beach of Yakum, as our Kula party sit round the camp fires
at night. One of the old men, well-known for the excellence of his
kayga'u, and boastful of it, would tell his story, entering minutely
into all the details, however often the others might have heard about
them before, or even assisted at the performance of his magic. He
would then proceed to describe, with extreme realism, and dwelling
graphically on every point, the story of a shipwreck, very much as if
he had gone through one himself. As a matter of fact, no one alive
at present has had any personal experience of such a catastrophe,
though many have lived through frequent narrow escapes in stormy
weather. Based on this, and on what they have heard themselves
of the tradition of shipwrecks, natives will tell the story with
characteristic vividness. Thus, the account given below is not only
a summary of native belief, it is an ethnographic document in itself,
representing the manner in which such type of narrative would be told
over camp fires, the same subject being over and over again repeated
by the same man, and listened to by the same audience, exactly as we,
when children, or the peasants of Eastern Europe, will hearken to
familiar fairy tales and Märchen. The only deviation here from what
would actually take place in such a story-telling, is the insertion of
magical formulæ into the narrative. The speaker might indeed repeat
his magic, were he speaking in broad daylight, in his village, to a
group of close kinsmen and friends. But being on a small island in
the middle of the ocean, and at night, the recital of spells would be
a taboo of the kayga'u; nor would a man ever recite his magic before
a numerous audience, except on certain occasions at mortuary vigils,
where people are expected to chant their magic aloud before hundreds
of listeners.

Returning then again to our group of sailors, who sit under the stunted
pandanus trees of Yakum, let us listen to one of the companions of
the daring Maradiana, now dead, to one of the descendants of the
great Maniyuwa. He will tell us how, early in the morning, on the
day of departure from Sinaketa, or sometimes on the next morning,
when they leave Muwa, he performs the first rite of kayga'u. Wrapping
up a piece of leyya (wild ginger root) in a bit of dried banana leaf,
he chants over it the long spell of the giyorokaywa, the kayga'u of
the Above. He chants this spell into the leaf, holding it cup-shaped,
with the morsel of ginger root at the bottom, so that the spell
might enter into the substance to be medicated. After that, the leaf
is immediately wrapped round, so as to imprison the magical virtue,
and the magician ties the parcel round his left arm, with a piece of
bast or string. Sometimes he will medicate two bits of ginger and make
two parcels, of which the other will be placed in a string necklet,
and carried on his breast. Our narrator, who is the master of one
of the canoes, will probably not be the only one within the circle
round the camp fire, who carries these bundles of medicated ginger;
for though a toliwaga must always perform this rite as well as know all
the other magic of shipwreck, as a rule several of the older members
of his crew also know it, and have also prepared their magical bundles.

This is one of the spells of the giyorokaywa, such as the old man
said over the ginger root:


                   GIYOROKAYWA NO. 1 (LEYYA KAYGA'U).

    "I will befog Muyuwa!" (repeated). "I will befog
    Misima!" (repeated). "The mist springs up; the mist makes them
    tremble. I befog the front, I shut off the rear; I befog the
    rear, I shut off the front. I fill with mist, mist springs up;
    I fill with mist, the mist which makes them tremble."

    This is the opening part of the formula, very clear, and easy to
    be translated. The mist is magically invoked, the word for mist
    being repeated with several verbal combinations, in a rhythmic and
    alliterative manner. The expression tremble, maysisi, refers to
    a peculiar belief, that when a sorcerer or sorceress approaches
    the victim, and this man paralyses them with a counter spell,
    they lose their bearings, and stand there trembling.

    The main part of this spell opens up with the word 'aga'u,' 'I
    befog,' which, like all such leading words of a spell is first of
    all intoned in a long, drawn-out chant, and then quickly repeated
    with a series of words. Then the word 'aga'u' is replaced by 'aga'u
    sulu,' 'I befog, lead astray,' which in its turn makes way for,
    'aga'u boda,' 'I befog, shut off.' The list of words repeated
    in succession with each of these three expressions is a long
    one. It is headed by the words 'the eyes of the witches.' Then,
    'the eyes of the sea-crab.' Then, always with the word 'eyes,'
    the animals, worms and insects which threaten drowning men in the
    sea, are enumerated. After they are exhausted, the various parts
    of the body are repeated; then finally, a long list of villages
    is recited, preceded by the word aga'u, forming phrases such as:
    "I befog the eyes of the women of Wawela, etc."

    Let us reconstruct a piece of this middle part in a consecutive
    manner. "I befog ...! I befog, I befog, the eyes of the witches! I
    befog the eyes of the little crabs! I befog the eyes of the hermit
    crab! I befog the eyes of the insects on the beach! ... etc."

    "I befog the hand, I befog the foot, I befog the head. I befog
    the shoulders ... etc."

    "I befog the eyes of the women of Wawela; I befog the eyes of the
    women of Kaulasi; I befog the eyes of the women of Kumilabwaga,
    I befog the eyes of the women of Vakuta ... etc., etc."

    "I befog, lead astray, the eyes of the witches; I befog, lead
    astray the eyes of the little crab! ... etc."

    "I befog, shut off the eyes of the witches, I befog, shut off
    the eyes of the little crab ... etc., etc."

    It can easily be seen how long drawn such a spell is, especially
    as in this middle part, the magician will often come back to where
    he has started, and repeat the leading word over and over again
    with the others. Indeed, this can be taken as a typical tapwana,
    or middle part, of a long spell, where the leading words are,
    so to speak, well rubbed into the various other expressions. One
    feature of this middle part is remarkable, namely, that the
    beings from below, the crabs, the sea insects and worms are
    invoked, although the spell is one of the giyorokaywa type,
    the magic of the Above. This is an inconsistency frequently met
    with; a contradiction between the ideas embodied in the spell,
    and the theory of the magic, as explicitly formulated by the
    informants. The parts of the body enumerated in the tapwana
    refer to the magician's own person, and to his companions in the
    canoe. By this part of the spell, he surrounds himself and all
    his companions with mist, which makes them invisible to all the
    evil influences.

    After the long tapwana has been recited, there follows the last
    part, which, however, is not chanted in this case, but spoken in
    a low, persuasive, tender voice.

    "I hit thy flanks; I fold over thy mat, thy bleached mat of
    pandanus; I shall make it into thy mantle. I take thy sleeping
    doba (grass skirt), I cover thy loins; remain there, snore within
    thy house! I alone myself" (here the reciter's name is uttered)
    "I shall remain in the sea, I shall swim!"


This last part throws some interesting sidelights on native belief
in mulukwausi. We see here the expression of the idea that the body
of the witch remains in the house, whilst she herself goes out on her
nefarious errand. Molilakwa, the magician of Oburaku who gave me this
spell, said in commentary to this last part:


    "The yoyova casts off her body (inini wowola--which really means
    'peals off her skin'); she lies down and sleeps, we hear her
    snoring. Her covering (kapwalela that is, her outward body,
    her skin) remains in the house, and she herself flies (titolela
    biyova). Her skirt remains in the house, she flies naked. When
    she meets men, she eats us. In the morning, she puts on her body,
    and lies down in her hut. When we cover her loins with the doba,
    she cannot fly any more."


This last sentence refers to the magical act of covering, as expressed
in the last part of the spell.

Here we find another variant of belief as to the nature of the
mulukwausi, to be added to those mentioned before. Previously we
met the belief of the disassociation of the woman into the part that
remains, and the part that flies. But here the real personality is
located in the flying part, whereas what remains is the 'covering.' To
imagine the mulukwausi, the flying part, as a 'sending,' in the light
of this belief, would not be correct. In general, such categories
as 'agent,' and 'sending,' or as 'real self' and 'emanation' etc.,
etc., can be applied to native belief as rough approximations only,
and the exact definition should be given in terms of native statement.

The final sentence of this spell, containing the wish to remain alone
in the sea, to be allowed to swim and drift, is a testimony to the
belief that without mulukwausi, there is no danger to a man adrift
on a piece of wreckage among the foaming waves of a stormy sea.

After reciting this lengthy spell, the toliwaga, as he tells us in
his narrative, has had to perform another rite, this time, over his
lime-pot. Taking out the stopper of rolled palm leaf and plaited
fibre from the baked and decorated gourd in which he keeps his lime,
he utters another spell of the giyorokaywa cycle:


                   GIYOROKAYWA NO. 2 (PWAKA KAYGA'U).

    "There on Muruwa, I arise, I stand up! Iwa, Sewatupa, at
    the head--I rumble, I disperse. Kasabwaybwayreta, Namedili,
    Toburitolu, Tobwebweso, Tauva'u, Bo'abwa'u, Rasarasa. They are
    lost, they disappear."

    This beginning, full of archaic expressions, implicit meanings
    and allusions and personal names, is very obscure. The first
    words refer probably to the head-quarters of sorcery; Muruwa
    (or Murua--Woodlark Island), Iwa, Sewatupa. The long list of
    personal names following afterwards contains some mythical ones,
    like Kasabwaybwayreta, and some others, which I cannot explain,
    though the words Tobwebweso, Tauva'u, and Bo'abwa'u suggest that
    this is a list in which some sorcerers' names figure. As a rule,
    in such spells, a list of names signifies that all those who have
    used and handed down this formula, are enumerated. In some cases
    the people mentioned are frankly mythical heroes. Sometimes a
    few mythical names are chanted, and then comes a string of actual
    people, forming a sort of pedigree of the spell. If these in this
    spell are ancestor names they all refer to mythical personalities,
    and not to real ancestors. [68] The last words contained an
    expression typical of the kayga'u. Then comes the middle part.

    "I arise, I escape from bara'u; I arise, I escape from yoyova. I
    arise, I escape from mulukwausi. I arise, I escape from bowo'u,
    etc.," repeating the leading words "I arise, I escape from--"
    with the words used to describe the flying witches in the various
    surrounding districts. Thus the word bara'u comes from Muyuwa
    (Woodlark Island), where it describes the sorceress, and not,
    as in other Massim districts, a male sorcerer. The words yoyova,
    mulukwausi need no explanation. Bowo'u is an Amphlettan word. Words
    from Dobu, Tubetube, etc., follow. Then the whole period is
    repeated, adding 'eyes of' in the middle of each phrase, so that
    it runs:

    "I arise, I escape from the eyes of the bara'u. I arise, I escape
    from the eyes of the yoyova, etc." The leading words, 'I arise,
    I escape from' are then replaced by: 'They wander astray,' which,
    again, make way to 'the sea is cleared off.' This whole middle
    part of the spell is clear, and needs no commentary. Then comes
    the concluding period (dogina):

    "I am a manuderi (small bird), I am a kidikidi (small sea bird),
    I am a floating log, I am a piece of sea-weed; I shall produce
    mist till it encloses all, I shall befog, I shall shut off with
    fog. Mist, enveloped in mist, dissolving in mist am I. Clear is
    the sea, (the mulukwausi are) straying in mist." This part also
    needs no special commentary.


This is again a long spell of the giyorokaywa type, that is, directed
against the mulukwausi, and in this the spell is consistent, for the
mulukwausi alone are invoked in the middle period.

After the spell has been chanted into the lime pot, this is well
stoppered, and not opened till the end of the journey. It must be noted
that these two giyorokaywa spells have been spoken by our toliwaga in
the village or on Muwa beach, and in day time. For, as said above,
it is a taboo to utter them in the night or at sea. From the moment
he has spoken these two spells, both medicated substances, the ginger
root and the lime in the lime pot, remain near him. He has also in the
canoe some stones of those brought from the Koya, and called binabina,
in distinction to the dead coral, which is called dakuna. Over these
stones, at the moment of the occurrence of danger, a spell of the
Underneath, a giyotanawa will be recited. The following is a formula
of this type, short as they always are.


                   GIYOTANAWA NO. 1 (DAKUNA KAYGA'U).

    "Man, bachelor, woman, young girl; woman, young girl, man,
    bachelor! Traces, traces obliterated by cobwebs; traces,
    obliterated by turning up (the material in which they were
    left); I press, I close down! Sharks of Dukutabuya, I press,
    I close down; Sharks of Kaduwaga, I press, I close down," etc.,
    the sharks of Muwa, Galeya, Bonari, and Kaulokoki being invoked
    in turn. All these words are names of marked parts of the sea,
    in and around the Trobriand Lagoon. The formula ends up with
    the following peroration: "I press down thy neck, I open up thy
    passage of Kiyawa, I kick thee down, O shark. Duck down under
    water, shark. Die, shark, die away."


The commentary to the opening sentences given by my informant,
Molilakwa of Oburaku, was:


    "This magic is taught to people when they are quite young. Hence
    the mention of young people."


The obliterating of traces will be made clearer by the account
which follows, in which we shall see that to obliterate traces, to
put off the scent the shark and mulukwausi are the main concerns of
the shipwrecked party. The middle part refers to sharks only, and so
does the peroration. The passage of Kiyawa near Tuma is mentioned in
several types of magical exorcisms, when the evil influence is being
banished. This passage lies between the main island and the island
of Tuma, and leads into the unknown regions of the North-Western seas.

It will be best to quote here another formula of the giyotanawa type,
and a very dramatic one. For this is the formula spoken at the critical
moment of shipwreck. At the moment when the sailors decide to abandon
the craft and to plunge into the sea, the toliwaga stands up in the
canoe, and slowly turning round so as to throw his words towards all
four winds, intones in a loud voice this spell:


                           GIYOTANAWA NO. 2.

    "Foam, foam, breaking wave, wave! I shall enter into the breaking
    wave, I shall come out from behind it. I shall enter from behind
    into the wave, and I shall come out in its breaking foam!"

    "Mist, gathering mist, encircling mist, surround, surround me!"

    "Mist, gathering mist, encircling mist, surround, surround me,
    my mast!

    Mist, gathering mist, etc. ... surround me, the nose of my canoe.

    Mist, etc. ... surround me, my sail,

    Mist, etc. ... surround me, my steering oar,

    Mist, etc. ... surround me, my rigging,

    Mist, etc. ... surround me, my platform,"

    And so on, enumerating one after the other all the parts of the
    canoe and its accessories. Then comes the final part of the spell:

    "I shut off the skies with mist; I make the sea tremble with mist;
    I close up your mouth, sharks, bonubonu (small worms), ginukwadewo
    (other worms). Go underneath and we shall swim on top."


Little is needed as a commentary to this magic. Its beginning is
very clear, and singularly well depicts the situation in which it
is uttered. The end refers directly to the primary aim of the magic,
to the warding off of the Underneath, of the dangerous animals in the
sea. The only ambiguity refers to the middle part, where the magical
leading words of 'enveloping by mist' are associated with a list of
names of the parts of the canoe. I am not certain whether this is to
be interpreted, in the sense that the toliwaga wants to surround his
whole canoe with mist so that it may not be seen by the sharks, etc.,
or whether, on the contrary, just on the verge of abandoning his canoe,
and anxious to cut himself off from its various parts which may turn
on him and 'eat him,' he therefore wants to surround each of them
with mist so that it may be blinded. The latter interpretation fits
the above-quoted belief that certain parts of the canoe, especially
the carved human figures on the prow-board and the mast, the ribs
of the canoe, and certain other parts of its construction, 'eat' the
shipwrecked men. But again, in this spell, there are enumerated not
certain parts, but every part, and that undoubtedly is not consistent
with this belief, so the question must remain open.




IV

I have anticipated some of the events of the consecutive narrative
of shipwreck, in order to give the two last mentioned magical formulæ
first, and not to have to interrupt the tale of our toliwaga, to which
we now return. We left it at the point where, having said his first
two kayga'u formulæ over the ginger and into the lime pot, he embarks,
keeping these two things handy, and putting some binabina stones
within his reach. From here, his narrative becomes more dramatic. He
describes the approaching storm:


                  NARRATIVE OF SHIPWRECK AND SALVAGE.

    "The canoe sails fast; the wind rises; big waves come; the wind
    booms, du-du-du-du.... The sails flutter; the lamina (outrigger)
    rises high! All the usagelu crouch on the lamina. I speak magic to
    calm the wind. The big spell of the Sim-sim. They know all about
    yavata (North-Westerley Monsoon wind). They live in the eye of
    the yavata. The wind abates not, not a little bit. It booms, it
    gains strength, it booms loud du-du-du-du-du. All the usagelu are
    afraid. The mulukwausi scream, u-ú, u-ú, u-ú, u; their voices are
    heard in the wind. With the wind they scream and come flying. The
    veva (sheet rope) is torn from the hands of the tokabinaveva. The
    sail flutters freely in the wind; it is torn away. It flies
    far into the sea; it falls on the waters. The waves break over
    the canoe. I stand up. I take the binabina stones; I recite the
    kayga'u over them, the giyotanawa, the spell of the Underneath. The
    short spell, the very strong spell. I throw the stones into the
    deep. They weigh down the sharks, the vineylida; they close the
    Gaping Depth. The fish cannot see us. I stand up, I take my lime
    pot; I break it. The lime I throw into the wind. It wraps us up
    in mist. Such a mist that no one can see us. The mulukwausi lose
    sight of us. We hear them shout near by. They shout u-û, u-û, u-û,
    u. The sharks, the bonubonu, the soka do not see us; the water
    is turbid. The canoe is swamped, the water is in it. It drifts
    heavily, the waves break over us. We break the vatotuwa, (the
    sticks joining the float to the platform). The lamina (outrigger
    float) is severed; we jump from the waga; we catch hold of the
    lamina. On the lamina we drift. I utter the great Kaytaria spell;
    the big fish iraviyaka comes. It lifts us. It takes the lamina
    on its back, and carries us. We drift, we drift, we drift."

    "We approach a shore; the iraviyaka brings us there, the iraviyaka
    puts us on the shallows. I take a stout pole, I lift it off;
    I speak a spell. The iraviyaka turns back to the deep sea."

    "We are all on the dayaga (fringing reef). We stand inwater. The
    water is cold, we all shiver with cold. We do not go ashore. We
    are afraid of the mulukwausi. They follow us ashore. They wait for
    us ashore. I take a dakuna (piece of coral stone), I say a spell
    over it. I throw the stone on the beach; it makes a big thud;
    good; the mulukwausi are not there. We go ashore. Another time,
    I throw a stone, we hear nothing: mulukwausi are on the beach;
    they catch it; we hear nothing. We remain on the dayaga. I take
    some leyya (ginger). I spit it at the beach. I throw another
    stone. The mulukwausi do not see it. It falls down; we hear it. We
    go ashore; we sit on the sand in a row. We sit in one row, one man
    near another, as on the lamina (in the same order as they drifted
    on the lamina). I make a charm over the comb; all the usagelu comb
    their hair; they tease their hair a long time. They are very cold;
    we do not make the fire. First, I put order on the beach; I take
    the piece of leyya, I spit it over the beach. One time, when the
    leyya is finished, I take some kasita leaves (the beach is always
    full of these). I put them on the shore, I put a stone on them,
    uttering a spell--afterwards, we make fire. All sit round and
    warm themselves at the fire."

    "At day time, we don't go to the village; the mulukwausi would
    follow us. After dark, we go. Like on the lamina, we march in the
    same order, one after the other. I go last; I chant a spell over
    a libu plant. I efface our traces. I put the libu on our track;
    I put the weeds together. I make the path confused. I say a charm
    to the spider, that he might make a cobweb. I say a charm to the
    bush-hen, that she might turn up the soil."

    "We go to the village. We enter the village, we pass the main
    place. No one sees us; we are in mist, we are invisible. We enter
    the house of my veyola (maternal kinsman), he medicates some
    leyya; he spits (magically) on all of us. The mulukwausi smell us;
    they smell the salt water on our skins. They come to the house,
    the house trembles. A big wind shakes the house, we hear big thuds
    against the house. The owner of the house medicates the leyya and
    spits over us; they cannot see us. A big fire is made in the house;
    plenty of smoke fills the house. The leyya and the smoke blind
    their eyes. Five days we sit in smoke, our skin smells of smoke;
    our hair smells of smoke; the mulukwausi cannot smell us. Then
    I medicate some water and coco-nut, the usagelu wash and annoint
    themselves. They leave the house, they sit on the kaukweda (spot
    before the house). The owner of the house chases them away. 'Go,
    go to your wife;' we all go, we return to our houses."


I have given here a reconstruction of a native account, as I have often
heard it told with characteristic vividness: spoken in short, jerky
sentences, with onamatopoetic representations of sound, the narrative
exaggerates certain features, and omits others. The excellency of
the narrator's own magic, the violence of the elements at critical
moments, he would always reiterate with monotonous insistence. He would
diverge into some correlated subject, jump ahead, missing out several
stages, come back, and so on, so that the whole is quite incoherent
and unintelligible to a white listener, though the native audience
follows its trend perfectly well. For it must be remembered that,
when a native tells such a story, the events are already known to
his listeners, who have grown up gradually becoming familiar with
the narrow range of their tribal folklore. Our toliwaga, telling this
story over again on the sandbank of Yakum, would dwell on such points
as allowed him to boast of his kayga'u, to describe the violence of
the storm, to bear witness to the traditional effects of the magic.

It is necessary for an Ethnographer to listen several times to such a
narrative, in order to have a fair chance of forming some coherent
idea of its trend. Afterwards, by means of direct examination,
he can succeed in placing the facts in their proper sequence. By
questioning the informants about details of rite and magic, it is
possible then to obtain interpretations and commentaries. Thus the
whole of a narrative can be constructed, the various fragments, with
all their spontaneous freshness, can be put in their proper places,
and this is what I have done in giving this account of shipwreck. [69]

A few words of comment must now be given on the text of the above
narrative. In it, a number of magical rites were mentioned, besides
those which were described first with their spells. Something must
be said more in detail about the spells of the subsequent magical
performances. There are some eleven of them. First comes the ritual
invocation of the fish which helps the shipwrecked sailors. The
spell corresponding to this, is called kaytaria, and it is an
important formula, which every toliwaga is supposed to know. The
question arises, has this rite ever been practised in reality? Some
of the actions taken by the shipwrecked natives, such as the cutting
of the the outrigger float when the boat is abandoned, are quite
rational. It would be dangerous to float on the big, unwieldy canoe
which might be constantly turned round and round by the waves, and if
smashed to pieces, might injure the sailors with its wreckage. In this
fact, perhaps there is also the empirical basis for the belief that
some fragments of the canoe 'eat' the shipwrecked men. The round,
symmetrical log of the lamina, on the other hand, will serve as
an excellent lifebuoy. Perhaps a toliwaga, arrived at such a pass,
would really utter the kaytaria spell. And if the party were saved,
they would probably all declare, and, no doubt believe, that the fish
had come to their summons, and somehow or other helped in the rescue.

It is less easy to imagine what elements in such an experience might
have given rise to the myth that the natives, landed on the shore,
magically lift the fish from the shallow waters by means of a charmed
pole. This indeed seems a purely imaginary incident, and my main
informant, Molilakwa of Oburaku, from whom I obtained the kaytaria
spell, did not know the spell of the pole, and would have had to
leave the iraviaka to its own fate in the shallows. Nor could I hear
of anyone else professing to know this spell. The formula uttered
over the stone to be thrown on the beach was equally unknown to the
circle of my informants. Of course, in all such cases, when a man
carrying on a system of magic would come to a gap in his knowledge, he
would perform the rite without the spell, or utter the most suitable
spell of the system. Thus here, as the stone is thrown in order to
reconnoitre whether the mulukwausi are waiting for them, a spell of
the giyorokaywa, the spell of the mulukwausi, might be uttered over
the stone. Over the combs, as well as over the herbs on the beach,
a giyorokaywa spell would be uttered, according to my informants,
but probably, a different spell from the one spoken originally over
the ginger root. Molilakwa, for instance, knows two spells of the
giyorokaywa, both of which are suitable to be spoken over the ginger
and over the beach respectively. Then there comes another spell,
to be uttered over the libu plant, and in addressing the spider and
the bush-hen. Molilakwa told me that the same spell would be said in
the three cases, but neither he, nor anyone else, among my informants
could give me this spell. The magic done in the village, while the
shipwrecked men remained in the smoky hut, would be all accompanied
by the leyya (ginger) spells.

One incident in the above narrative might have struck the reader as
contradictory of the general theory of the mulukwausi belief, that,
namely, where the narrator declares that the party on the beach have to
wait till nightfall before they enter the village. The general belief
expressed in all the mulukwausi legends, as well as in the taboos of
the kayga'u, is that the witches are really dangerous only at night,
when they can see and hear better. Such contradictions, as I have said,
are often met in native belief, and in this, by the way, the savages do
not differ from ourselves. My informant, from whom I had this version,
simply said that such was the rule and the custom, and that they had
to wait till night. In another account, on the other hand, I was told
that the party must proceed to the village immediately after having
performed the several rites on the beach, whether night or day.

There also arises the main question, regarding this narrative,
to which allusion has been made already, namely, how far does it
represent the normal behaviour in shipwreck, and how far is it a
sort of standardised myth? There is no doubt that shipwreck in these
seas, surrounded in many parts by islands, is not unlikely to end
by the party's being saved. This again would result in some such
explanation as that contained in our narrative. Naturally, I tried
to record all the actual cases of shipwreck within the natives'
memory. Some two generations ago, one of the chiefs of Omarakana,
named Numakala, perished at sea, and with him all his crew. A canoe
of another Eastern Trobriand village, Tilakaywa, was blown far North,
and stranded in Kokopawa, from where it was sailed back by its crew,
when the wind turned to the North-West. Although this canoe was not
actually shipwrecked, its salvation is credited to kayga'u magic,
and to the kind fish, iraviyaka. A very intelligent informant of
mine explained this point of view in answer to some of my cavillings:
"If this canoe had been wrecked, it would have been saved also."

A party from Muyuwa (Woodlark Island) were saved on the shore of
Boyowa. In the South of the Island, several cases are on record where
canoes were wrecked and saved in the d'Entrecasteaux Islands or in the
Amphletts. Once the whole crew were eaten by cannibals, getting ashore
in a hostile district of Fergusson Island, and one man only escaped,
and ran along the shore, south-eastwards towards Dobu. Thus there is
a certain amount of historical evidence for the saving power of the
magic, and the mixture of fanciful and real elements makes our story
a good example of what could be called standardised or universalised
myth--that is, a myth referring not to one historical event but to
a type of occurrence, happening universally.




V

Let us now give the text of the remaining spells which belong to the
above narrative, but have not been adduced there, so as not to spoil
its flow. First of all there is the kaytaria spell, that which the
toliwaga, drifting alongside his crew on the detached canoe float,
intones in a loud, slow voice, in order to attract the iraviyaka.


                            KAYTARIA SPELL.

    "I lie, I shall lie down in my house, a big house. I shall sharpen
    my ear, I shall hear the roaring of the sea--it foams up, it makes
    a noise. At the bottom of Kausubiyai, come, lift me, take me,
    bring me to the top of Nabonabwana beach."

    Then comes a sentence with mythological allusions which I could
    not succeed in translating. After that follows the main part of
    the spell:

    "The suyusayu fish shall lift me up; my child, the suyusayu shall
    lift me up; my child's things, the suyusayu shall lift me up; my
    basket, etc.; my lime pot, etc.; my lime spoon, etc.; my house,
    etc.;" repeating the words "the suyusayu fish shall lift me up"
    with various expressions describing the toliwaga's equipment as
    well as his child, presumably a member of the shipwrecked crew.


There is no end part to this spell, as it was given to me; only
the beginning is repeated after the main part. It is not impossible
that Molilakwa himself, my informant, did not know the spell to the
end. Such magic, once learnt by a native, never used, and recited
perhaps once a year during a mortuary ceremony, or occasionally, in
order to show off, is easily forgotten. There is a marked difference
between the vacillating and uncertain way in which such spells are
produced by informants, and the wonderful precision and the easy
flow with which, for example, the spells, year after year performed
in public, will trip off the tongue of the garden magician.

I cannot give a correct commentary to the mythological names Kausubiyai
and Nabonabwana, in the first part of the spell. What this part means,
whether the reclining individual who hears the noises of the sea is
the magician, or whether it represents the sensations of the fish who
hears the calling for help, I could not make out. The meaning of the
middle part is plain, however. Suyusayu is another name for iraviyaka,
indeed, its magical name used only in spells, and not when speaking
of it in ordinary conversations.

The other formula to be given here is the other giyorokaywa spell,
which would be used in spitting the ginger on the beach after rescue,
and also in medicating the herbs, which will be put on the beach
and beaten with a stone. This spell is associated with the myth
of the origin of kayga'u, which must be related here, to make the
formula clear.

Near the beginning of time, there lived in Kwayawata, one of the
Marshall Bennetts, a family strange to our ideas of family life, but
quite natural in the world of Kiriwinian mythology. It consisted of
a man, Kalaytaytu, his sister, Isenadoga, and the youngest brother,
a dog, Tokulubweydoga. Like other mythological personages, their
names suggest that originally they must have conveyed some sort of
description. Doga means the curved, almost circular, boar's tusk used
as ornament. The name of the canine member of the family might mean
something like Man-with-circular-tusks-in-his-head, and his sister's
name, Woman-ornamented-with-doga. The eldest brother has in his
name the word taytu, which signifies the staple food (small yams) of
natives, and a verb, kalay, signifying 'to put on ornaments.' Not much
profit, however, can be deduced from this etymology, as far as I can
see, for the interpretation of this myth. I shall quote in a literal
translation the short version of this myth, as I obtained it first,
when the information was volunteered to me by Molilakwa in Oburaku.


                        MYTH OF TOKULUBWAYDOGA.

    "They live in Kwayawata; one day Kalaytayta goes to fish, gets
    into a small canoe (kewo'u). Behind him swims the dog. He comes to
    Digumenu. They fish with the older brother. They catch fish! The
    elder brother paddles; that one again goes behind; goes, returns
    to Kwayawata. They died; came Modokei, he learned the kayga'u,
    the inside of Tokulubwaydoga. The name of their mother, the mother
    of Tokulubwaydoga, is Tobunaygu."


This little fragment gives a good idea of what the first version
is, even of so well fixed a piece of narrative as a myth. It has
to be supplemented by inquiries as to the motives of the behaviour
of the various personages, as to the relations of one event to the
other. Thus, further questions revealed that the elder brother refused
to take the dog with him on this fishing expedition. Tokulubwaydoga
then determined to go all the same, and swam to Digumenu, following
the canoe of his brother. This latter was astonished to see him, but
none the less they went to work together. In fishing, the dog was more
successful than his brother, and thus aroused his jealousy. The man
then refused to take him back. Tokulubwaydoga then jumped into the
water, and again swam and arrived safely in Kwayawata. The point of
the story lies in the fact that the dog was able to do the swimming,
because he knew the kayga'u, otherwise the sharks, mulukwausi, or
other evil things would have eaten him. He got it from his mother,
the lady Tobunaygu, who could teach him this magic because she
was a mulukwausi herself. Another important point about this myth,
also quite omitted from the first version volunteered to me, is its
sociological aspect. First of all, there is the very interesting
incident, unparalleled in Kiriwinian tradition: the mother of the
three belonged to the Lukwasisiga clan. It was a most incongruous
thing for a dog, who is the animal of the Lukuba clan, to be born
into a Lukwasisiga family. However, there he was, and so he said:


    "Good, I shall be a Lukuba, this is my clan."


Now the incident of the quarrel receives its significance in so far as
the dog, the only one to whom the mother gave the kayga'u, did not hand
it over to his brother and sister who were of the Lukwasisiga clan,
and so the magic went down only the dog's own clan, the Lukuba. It must
be assumed (though this was not known to my informant) that Madokei,
who learnt the magic from the dog, was also a Lukuba man.

Like all mythological mother-ancestresses, Tobunaygu had no husband,
nor does this circumstance call forth any surprise or comment on the
part of the natives, since the physiological aspect of fatherhood is
not known among them, as I have repeatedly observed.

As can be seen, by comparing the original fragment, and the subsequent
amplification by inquiries, the volunteered version misses out the
most important points. The concatenation of events, the origin of the
kayga'u, the important sociological details, have to be dragged out
of the informant, or, to put it more correctly, he has to be made to
enlarge on points, to roam over all the subjects covered by the myth,
and from his statements then, one has to pick out and piece together
the other bits of the puzzle. On the other hand, the names of the
people, the unimportant statements of what they did and how they were
occupied are unfailingly given.

Let us adduce now the kayga'u, which is said to be derived from the
dog, and ultimately from his mother:


                       KAYGA'U OF TOKULUBWAYDOGA.

    "Tobunaygu (repeated), Manemanaygu (repeated), my mother a snake,
    myself a snake; myself a snake, my mother a snake. Tokulubwaydoga,
    Isenadoga, Matagagai, Kalaytaytu; bulumava'u tabugu Madokei. I
    shall befog the front, I shall shut off the rear; I shall befog
    the rear, I shall shut off the front."

    This exordium contains at first the invocation of the name of
    the mulukwausi, who was the source of the spell. Its pendant
    Manemanaygu is, according to my informant, derived from an archaic
    word nema, equivalent to the present day yama, hand. "As the
    right hand is to the left one, so is Tobunaygu to Manemanaygu,"
    which was expressed as a matter of fact in the less grammatically
    worded form; "this right hand, this left" (clapped together)
    "so Tobunaygu, Manemanaygu."

    Whether this analysis of my informant is correct must remain an
    open question. It must be remembered that magic is not taken by the
    natives as an ethnographic document, allowing of interpretations
    and developments, but as an instrument of power. The words are
    there to act, and not to teach. Questions as to the meaning of
    magic, as a rule, puzzled the informants, and therefore it is
    not easy to explain a formula or obtain a correct commentary upon
    it. All the same there are some natives who obviously have tried
    to get to the bottom of what the various words in magic represent.

    To proceed with our commentary, the phrase "My mother a snake,
    etc.," was thus explained to me by Molilakwa: "Supposing we strike
    a snake, already it vanishes, it does not remain; thus also we
    human beings, when mulukwausi catch us, we disappear." That
    is, we disappear after having spoken this magical formula,
    for in a formula the desired result is always expressed in
    anticipation. Molilakwa's description of a snake's behaviour is,
    according to my experience, not sound Natural History, but it
    probably expresses the underlying idea, namely the elusiveness
    of the snake, which would naturally be one of the metaphorical
    figures used in the spell.

    The string of words following the invocation of the snake are all
    mythical names, four of which we found mentioned in the above
    myth, while the rest remain obscure. The last-named, that of
    Modokei, is preceded by the words bulumavau tabugu, which means,
    'recent spirit of my ancestor,' which words are as a rule used
    in spells with reference to real grandfathers of the reciters.

    The middle part of the spell proceeds:--

    "I shall cover the eyes of the witches of Kitava; I shall cover
    the eyes of the witches of Kumwageya; I shall cover the eyes of
    the witches of Iwa; I shall cover the eyes of the witches of Gawa,
    etc., etc.," enumerating all the villages and islands renowned
    for their witches. This list is again recited, substituting for
    the expression "I shall cover," in succession, "I shall befog,"
    and "dew envelopes." This middle part needs no commentary.

    The end of this formula runs as follows:

    "I shall kick thy body, I shall take thy spirit skirt, I shall
    cover thy buttocks, I shall take thy mat, a pandanus mat, I
    shall take thy mantle. I shall strike thee with my foot, go,
    fly over Tuma, fly away. I myself in the sea (here the reciter's
    name is mentioned), I shall drift away, well." This last part of
    the spell is so much alike to the end of the spell first quoted
    in this chapter, that no commentary is needed.


The mythological and magical data presented in this chapter all bear
upon the native belief in flying witches and dangers at sea, a belief
in which elements of reality are strangely blended with traditionally
fixed fancies, in a way, however, not uncommon to human belief in
general. It is time now to return to our party on the beach at Yakum,
who, after having spent the night there, next morning rig up their
masts, and with a favourable wind, soon reach the waters of Gumasila
and Domdom.