THE CEREMONIAL BUILDING OF A WAGA
I
The building of the sea-going canoe (masawa) is inextricably bound
up with the general proceedings of the Kula. As we have said before,
in all villages where Kula is practised the masawa canoes are built
and repaired only in direct connection with it. That is, as soon as
a Kula expedition is decided upon, and its date fixed, all the canoes
of the village must be overhauled, and those too old for repair must
be replaced by new ones. As the overhauling differs only slightly
from building in the later, ceremonial stages of the procedure,
the account in this chapter covers both.
To the native, the construction of the canoe is the first link in
the chain of the Kula performances. From the moment that the tree is
felled till the return of the oversea party, there is one continuous
flow of events, following in regular succession. Not only that:
as we shall see, the technicalities of construction are interrupted
and punctuated by magical rites. Some of these refer to the canoe,
others belong to the Kula. Thus, canoe-building and the first stage
of Kula dovetail into one another. Again, the launching of the canoe,
and especially the kabigidoya (the formal presentation visit) are
in one respect the final acts of canoe-building, and in another
they belong to the Kula. In giving the account of canoe-building,
therefore, we start on the long sequence of events which form a Kula
expedition. No account of the Kula could be considered complete in
which canoe-building had been omitted.
In this chapter, the incidents will be related one after the other
as they happen in the normal routine of tribal life, obeying the
commands of custom, and the indications of belief, the latter acting
more rigidly and strongly even than the former. It will be necessary,
in following this consecutive account, to keep in mind the definite,
sociological mechanism underlying the activities, and the system of
ideas at work in regulating labour and magic. The social organisation
has been described in the previous chapter. We shall remember that
the owner, the expert or experts, a small group of helpers, and
the whole community are the social factors, each of which fulfils a
different function in the organisation and performance of work. As
to the magical ideas which govern the various rites, they will be
analysed later on in the course of this and some of the following
chapters, and also in Chapter XVII. Here it must suffice to say that
they belong to several different systems of ideas. The one based on
the myth of the flying canoe refers directly to the canoe; it aims
at imparting a general excellence, and more especially the quality of
speed to the canoe. The rites of the other type are really exorcisms
directed against evil bewitchment (bulubwalata) of which the natives
are much afraid. The third system of magic (performed during canoe
construction) is the Kula magic, based on its own mythological cycle,
and although performed on the canoe, yet aiming at the imparting of
success to the toliwaga in his Kula transactions. Finally, at the
beginnings of the proceedings there is some magic addressed to the
tokway, the malignant wood-sprite.
The construction of the canoe is done in two main stages, differing
from one another in the character of the work, in the accompanying
magic, and in the general sociological setting. In the first stage,
the component parts of the canoe are prepared. A big tree is cut,
trimmed into a log, then hollowed out and made into the basic dug-out;
the planks, boards, poles, and sticks are prepared. This is achieved
by slow, leisurely work, and it is done by the canoe-builder with
the assistance of a few helpers, usually his relatives or friends
or else those of the toliwaga. This stage generally takes a long
time, some two to six months, and is done in fits and starts, as
other occupations allow, or the mood comes. The spells and rites
which accompany it belong to the tokway magic, and to that of the
flying canoe cycle. To this first stage also belongs the carving of
the decorative prow-boards. This is done sometimes by the builder,
sometimes by another expert, if the builder cannot carve.
The second stage is done by means of intense communal labour. As a
rule this stage is spread over a short time, only perhaps a week or
two--including the pauses between work. The actual labour, in which
the whole community is energetically engaged, takes up only some three
to five days. The work consists of the piecing together of the planks
and prow-boards, and, in case these do not fit well, of trimming them
appropriately, and then of the lashing them together. Next comes the
piecing and lashing of the outrigger, caulking and painting of the
canoe. Sail-making is also done at this time, and belongs to this
stage. As a rule, the main body of the canoe is constructed at one
sitting, lasting about a day; that is, the prow-boards are put in,
the ribs and planks fitted together, trimmed and lashed. Another day
is devoted to the attaching of the float and binding of the outrigger
frame and the platform. Caulking and painting are done at another
sitting, or perhaps at two more, while the sail is made on yet another
day. These times are only approximate, since the size of the canoe,
as well as the number of people participating in communal labour,
greatly varies. The second stage of canoe-building is accompanied
by Kula magic, and by a series of exorcisms on the canoe, and the
magic is performed by the owner of the canoe, and not by the builder
or expert. This latter, however, directs the technicalities of the
proceedings, in which he is assisted and advised by builders from
other villages; by sailing experts, and by the toliwaga and other
notables. The lashing of the canoe with a specially strong creeper,
called wayugo, is accompanied by perhaps the most important of the
rites and spells belonging to the flying canoe magic.
II
After the decision to build a waga has been taken, a tree suitable
for the main log has to be chosen. This, in the Trobriands, is not a
very easy task. As the whole plain is taken up by garden land, only
the small patches of fertile soil in the coral ridge which runs all
round the island, remain covered with jungle. There the tree must be
found, there felled, and thence transported to the village.
Once the tree is chosen, the toliwaga, the builder and a few helpers
repair to the spot, and a preliminary rite must be performed, before
they begin to cut it down. A small incision is made into the trunk,
so that a particle of food, or a bit of areca-nut can be put into
it. Giving this as an offering to the tokway (wood-sprite), the
magician utters an incantation:--
VABUSI TOKWAY SPELL.
"Come down, O wood-sprites, O Tokway, dwellers in branches, come
down! Come down, dwellers in branch forks, in branch shoots! Come
down, come, eat! Go to your coral outcrop over there; crowd there,
swarm there, be noisy there, scream there!
"Step down from our tree, old men! This is a canoe ill spoken of;
this is a canoe out of which you have been shamed; this is a canoe
out of which you have been expelled! At sunrise and morning, you
help us in felling the canoe; this our tree, old men, let it go
and fall down!"
This spell, given in free translation, which, however, follows the
original very closely, word for word, is far clearer than the average
sample of Trobriand magic. In the first part, the tokway is invoked
under various names, and invited to leave his abode, and to move to
some other place, and there to be at his ease. In the second part,
the canoe is mentioned with several epithets, all of which denote an
act of discourtesy or ill-omen. This is obviously done to compel the
tokway to leave the tree. In Boyowa, the yoba, the chasing away, is
under circumstances a great insult, and at times it commands immediate
compliance. This is always the case when the chaser belongs to the
local sub-clan of a village, and the person expelled does not. But the
yoba is always an act of considerable consequence, never used lightly,
and in this spell, it carries these sociological associations with
it. In the usual anticipatory way, characteristic of native speech,
the tree is called in the spell "canoe" (waga).
The object of this spell is written very plainly in every word of
it, and the natives also confirm it by saying that it is absolutely
necessary to get rid of the tokway. What would happen, however, if
the tokway were not expelled, is not so unequivocally laid down by
tradition, and it cannot be read out of the spell or the rite. Some
informants say that the canoe would be heavy; others that the wood
would be full of knots, and that there would be holes in the canoe,
or that it would quickly rot.
But though the rationale of the expulsion is not so well defined, the
belief in the tokway's evil influence, and in the dangers associated
with his presence is positive. And this is in keeping with the general
nature of the tokway, as we find him delineated by native belief. The
tokway is on the whole a harmful being, though the harm he does is
seldom more than an unpleasant trick, perhaps a sudden fright, an
attack of shooting pains, or a theft. The tokway live in trees or in
coral rocks and boulders, usually in the raybwag, the primeval jungle,
growing on the coastal ridge, full of outcrops and rocks. Some people
have seen a tokway, although he is invisible at will. His skin is
brown, like that of any Boyowan, but he has long, sleek hair, and
a long beard. He comes often at night, and frightens people. But,
though seldom seen, the tokway's wailing is often heard from the
branches of a big tree, and some trees evidently harbour more tokways
than others, since you can hear them very easily there. Sometimes,
over such trees, where people often hear the tokway and get a fright,
the above quoted incantation and rite are performed.
In their contact with men, the tokway show their unpleasant side;
often they come at night and steal food. Many cases can be quoted
when a man, as it seemed, was surprised in the act of stealing yams
out of a storehouse, but lo! when approached he disappeared--it was
a tokway. Then, sickness in some of its lighter forms is caused by
the tokway. Shooting pains, pricking and stabbing in one's inside,
are often due to him, for he is in possession of magic by which
he can insert small, sharp-edged and sharp-pointed objects into
the body. Fortunately some men know magic by which to extract
such objects. These men, of course, according to the general rule
of sorcery, can also inflict the same ailments. In olden days,
the tokway gave both the harmful and beneficent magic to some men,
and ever since, this form of sorcery and of concomitant healing have
been handed on from one generation to another.
Let us return to our canoe, however. After the rite has been performed,
the tree is felled. In olden days, when stone implements were used,
this must have been a laborious process, in which a number of men
were engaged in wielding the axe, and others in re-sharpening the
blunted or broken blades. The old technique was more like nibbling
away the wood in small chips, and it must have taken a long time to
cut out a sufficiently deep incision to fell the tree. After the tree
is on the ground, the preliminary trimming is done on the spot. The
branches are lopped off, and the log of appropriate length is made
out of the tree. This log is cut into the rough shape of a canoe,
so as to make it as light as possible, for now it has to be pulled
to the village or to the beach.
The transporting of the log is not an easy task, as it has to be
taken out of the uneven, rocky raybwag, and then pulled along very
bad roads. Pieces of wood are put on the ground every few metres,
to serve as slips on which the log can more easily glide than on the
rocks and uneven soil. In spite of that, and in spite of the fact that
many men are summoned to assist, the work of pulling the log is very
heavy. The men receive food in payment for it. Pig flesh is cooked
and distributed with baked yams; at intervals during the work they
refresh themselves with green coco-nut drinks and with sucking sugar
cane. Gifts of such food, given during work in payment of communal
labour, are called puwaya. To describe how heavy the work sometimes
is, the native will say, in a characteristically figurative manner:
"The pig, the coco drinks, the yams are finished, and yet we
pull--very heavy!"
In such cases the natives resort to a magical rite which makes
the canoe lighter. A piece of dry banana leaf is put on top of the
log. The owner or builder beats the log with a bunch of dry lalang
grass and utters the following spell:
KAYMOMWA'U SPELL.
"Come down, come down, defilement by contact with excrement! Come
down, defilement by contact with refuse! Come down, heaviness! Come
down, rot! Come down fungus! ..." and soon, invoking a number of
deteriorations to leave the log, and then a number of defilements
and broken taboos. In other words, the heaviness and slowness,
due to all these magical causes, are thrown out of the log.
This bunch of grass is then ritually thrown away. It is called momwa'u,
or the "heavy bunch." Another handful of the long lalang grass,
seared and dry, is taken, and this is the gagabile, the "light bunch,"
and with this the canoe is again beaten. The meaning of the rite is
quite plain: the first bunch takes into it the heaviness of the log,
and the second imparts lightness to it. Both spells also express this
meaning in plain terms. The second spell, recited with the gagabile
bunch, runs thus:
KAYGAGABILE SPELL.
"He fails to outrun me" (repeated many times). "The canoe trembles
with speed" (many times). A few untranslatable words are uttered;
then a long chain of ancestral names is invoked. "I lash you,
O tree; the tree flies; the tree becomes like a breath of wind;
the tree becomes like a butterfly; the tree becomes like a cotton
seed fluff. One sun" (i.e., time) "for my companions, midday
sun, setting sun; another sun for me----" (here the reciter's
name is uttered)--"the rising sun, the rays of the (rising) sun,
(the time of) opening the huts, (the time of the) rising of the
morning star!" The last part means: "My companions arrive at
sunset, while I arrive with the rising sun"--(indicating how far
my canoe exceeds them in speed.) []
These formulæ are used both to make the log lighter for the present
purpose of pulling it into the village, and in order to give it
greater speed in general, when it is made up into a waga.
After the log has been finally brought into the village, and left
on the baku, the main central place, the creeper by means of which
it has been pulled and which is called in this connection duku,
is not cut away at once. This is done ceremonially on the morning
of the following day, sometimes after even two or three days have
passed. The men of the community assemble, and the one who will scoop
out the canoe, the builder (tota'ila waga, "the cutter of the canoe")
performs a magical rite. He takes his adze (ligogu) and wraps some very
light and thin herbs round the blade with a piece of dried banana leaf,
itself associated with the idea of lightness. This he wraps only half
round, so that a broad opening is left, and the breath and voice have
free access to the herbs and blade of the adze. Into this opening,
the magician chants the following long spell:
KAPITUNENA DUKU SPELL.
"I shall wave them back, (i.e., prevent all other canoes from
overtaking me)!" repeated many times. "On the top of Si'a Hill;
women of Tokuna; my mother a sorceress, myself a sorcerer. It
dashes forward, it flies ahead. The canoe body is light; the
pandanus streamers are aflutter; the prow skims the waves;
the ornamental boards leap, like dolphins; the tabuyo (small
prow-board) breaks the waves; the lagim' (transversal prow-board)
breaks the waves. Thou sleepest in the mountain, thou sleepest
in Kuyawa Island. We shall kindle a small fire of lalang grass,
we shall burn aromatic herbs (i.e., at our destination in the
mountains)! Whether new or old, thou goest ahead."
This is the exordium of the formula. Then comes a very long middle
part, in a form very characteristic of Trobriand magic. This
form resembles a litany, in so far as a key word or expression
is repeated many times with a series of complementary words and
expressions. Then the first key word is replaced by another, which
in its turn, is repeated with the same series of expressions;
then comes another key word, and so on. We have thus two series
of words; each term of the first is repeated over and over again,
with all terms of the second, and in this manner, with a limited
number of words, a spell is very much lengthened out, since its
length is the product of the length of both series. In shorter
spells, there may be only one key word, and in fact, this is the
more usual type. In this spell, the first series consists of nouns
denoting different parts of the canoe; the second are verbs, such
as: to cut, to fly, to speed, to cleave a fleet of other canoes,
to disappear, to skim over the waves. Thus the litany runs in such
a fashion: "The tip of my canoe starts, the tip of my canoe flies,
the tip of my canoe speeds, etc., etc." After the long litany has
been chanted, the magician repeats the exordium, and finishes it
off with the conventional onomatopoetic word saydididi--which is
meant to imitate the flying of the witches.
After the recital of this long spell over the herbs and blade of his
adze, the magician wraps up the dry banana leaf, thus imprisoning
the magical virtue of the spell round the blade, and with this, he
strikes and cuts through the duku (the creeper used for the pulling
of the canoes.)
With this, the magic is not over yet, for on the same evening, when
the canoe is put on transversal logs (nigakulu), another rite has to
be carried out. Some herbs are placed on the transversals between them
and the body of the big canoe log. Over these herbs, again, another
spell has to be uttered. In order not to overload this account with
magical texts, I shall not adduce this spell in detail. Its wording
also plainly indicates that it is speed magic, and it is a short
formula running on directly, without cross-repetitions.
After that, for some days, the outside of the canoe body is worked. Its
two ends must be cut into tapering shape, and the bottom evened and
smoothed. After that is done, the canoe has to be turned over, this
time into its natural position, bottom down, and what is to be the
opening, upwards. Before the scooping out begins, another formula has
to be recited over the kavilali, a special ligogu (adze), used for
scooping out, which is inserted into a handle with a moveable part,
which then allows the cutting to be done at varying angles to the
plane of striking.
The rite stands in close connection to the myth of the flying
canoe, localised in Kudayuri, a place in the Island of Kitava, and
many allusions are made to this myth. [] After a short exordium,
containing untranslatable magical words, and geographical references,
the spell runs:
LIGOGU SPELL.
"I shall take hold of an adze, I shall strike! I shall enter my
canoe, I shall make thee fly, O canoe, I shall make thee jump! We
shall fly like butterflies, like wind; we shall disappear in
mist, we shall vanish. You will pierce the straits of Kadimwatu
(between the islands of Tewara and Uwama) you will break the
promontory of Saramwa (near Dobu), pierce the passage of Loma (in
Dawson Straits), die away in the distance, die away with the wind,
fade away with the mist, vanish away. Break through your seaweeds
(i.e., on coming against the shore). Put on your wreath (probably
an allusion to the seaweeds), make your bed in the sand. I turn
round, I see the Vakuta men, the Kitava men behind me; my sea,
the sea of Pilolu (i.e., the sea between the Trobriands and the
Amphletts); to-day the Kudayuri men will burn their fires (i.e.,
on the shores of Dobu). Bind your grass skirt together, O canoe"
(here the personal name of the canoe is mentioned), "fly!" The
last phrase contains an implicit hint that the canoe partakes
of the nature of a flying witch, as it should, according to the
Kudayuri myth.
After this, the canoe-builder proceeds to scoop out the log. This is
a long task, and a heavy one, and one which requires a good deal of
skill, especially towards the end, when the walls of the dug-out have
to be made sufficiently thin, and when the wood has to be taken off
evenly over the whole surface. Thus, although at the beginning the
canoe carpenter is usually helped by a few men--his sons or brothers
or nephews who in assisting him also learn the trade--towards the end
he has to do the work single-handed. It, therefore, always happens
that this stage takes a very long time. Often the canoe will lie
for weeks, untouched, covered with palm leaves against the sun,
and filled with some water to prevent drying and cracking (see Plate
XXV). Then the carpenter will set to work for a few days, and pause
again. In almost all villages, the canoe is put up in the central
place, or before the builder's hut. In some of the Eastern villages,
the scooping out is done on the sea beach, to avoid pulling the heavy
log to and from the village.
Parallel with the process of hollowing out, the other parts of the
canoe are made ready to be pieced together. Four broad and long
planks form the gunwale; L-shaped pieces of wood are cut into ribs;
long poles are prepared for longitudinal support of the ribs, and
for platform rafters; short poles are made ready as transversals of
the platform and main supports of the outrigging; small sticks to
connect the float with the transversals; finally, the float itself,
a long, bulky log. These are the main, constituent parts of a canoe,
to be made by the builder. The four carved boards are also made by
him if he knows how to carve, otherwise another expert has to do this
part of the work (see Plate XXVI).
When all the parts are ready, another magical rite has to be
performed. It is called "kapitunela nanola waga": "the cutting off
of the canoe's mind," an expression which denotes a change of mind,
a final determination. In this case, the canoe makes up its mind to
run quickly. The formula is short, contains at the beginning a few
obscure words, and then a few geographical references to some places
in the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago. It is recited over a few drops
of coco-nut oil, which is then wrapped up in a small bundle. The same
spell is then again spoken over the ligogu blade, round which a piece
of dry banana has been wrapped in the manner described above. The
canoe is turned bottom up, the bundle with coco-nut oil placed on it
and struck with the adze. With this the canoe is ready to be pieced
together, and the first stage of its construction is over.
III
As has been said above, the two stages differ from one another in
the nature of work done and in their sociological and ceremonial
setting. So far, we have seen only a few men engaged in cutting the
tree and scooping it out and then preparing the various parts of the
canoe. Industriously, but slowly and deliberately, with many pauses,
they toil over their work, sitting on the brown, trodden soil of the
village in front of the huts, or scooping the canoe in the central
place. The first part of the task, the felling of the tree, took us
to the tall jungle and intricate undergrowth, climbing and festooned
around the fantastic shapes of coral rocks.
Now, with the second stage, the scene shifts to the clean, snow-white
sand of a coral beach, where hundreds of natives in festive array
crowd around the freshly scraped body of the canoe. The carved boards,
painted in black, white and red, the green fringe of palms and jungle
trees, the blue of the sea--all lend colour to the vivid and lively
scene. Thus I saw the building of a canoe done on the East shore
of the Trobriands, and in this setting I remember it. In Sinaketa,
instead of the blue, open sea, breaking in a belt of white foam
outside on the fringing reef and coming in limpid waves to the beach,
there are the dull, muddy browns and greens of the Lagoon, playing
into pure emerald tints where the clean sandy bottom begins.
Into one of these two scenes, we must now imagine the dug-out
transported from the village, after all is ready, and after the summons
of the chief or headman has gone round the neighbouring villages. In
the case of a big chief, several hundreds of natives will assemble
to help, or to gaze on the performance. When a small community with
a second-rate headman construct their canoe, only a few dozen people
will come, the relatives-in-law of the headman and of other notables,
and their close friends.
After the body of the canoe and all the accessories have been placed
in readiness, the proceedings are opened by a magical rite, called
Katuliliva tabuyo. This rite belongs to the Kula magic, for which
the natives have a special expression; they call it mwasila. It is
connected with the inserting of the ornamental prow-boards into their
grooves at both ends of the canoe. These ornamental parts of the canoe
are put in first of all, and this is done ceremonially. A few sprigs
of the mint plant are inserted under the boards, as they are put in,
and the toliwaga (owner of the canoe) hammers the boards in by means
of a special stone imported from Dobu, and ritually repeats a formula
of the mwasila magic. The mint plant (sulumwoya) plays an important
part in the mwasila (Kula magic) as well as in love spells, and in
the magic of beauty. Whenever a substance is to be medicated for the
purpose of charming, seducing, or persuading, as a rule sulumwoya
is used. This plant figures also in several myths, where it plays a
similar part, the mythical hero always conquering the foe or winning
a woman by the use of the sulumwoya.
I shall not adduce the magical formulæ in this account, with the
exception of the most important one. Even a short summary of each
of them would obstruct the narrative, and it would blur completely
the outline of the consecutive account of the various activities. The
various complexities of the magical ritual and of the formulæ will be
set forth in Chapter XVII. It may be mentioned here, however, that not
only are there several types of magic performed during canoe building,
such as the mwasila (Kula magic), the canoe speed magic, exorcisms
against evil magic, and exorcism of the tokway, but within each of
these types, there are different systems of magic, each with its own
mythological basis, each localised in a different district, and each
having of course different formulæ and slightly different rites. []
After the prow-boards are put in, and before the next bit of technical
work is done, another magical rite has to be performed. The body of
the canoe, now bright with the three-coloured boards, is pushed into
the water. A handful of leaves, of a shrub called bobi'u, is charmed
by the owner or by the builder, and the body of the canoe is washed in
sea water with the leaves. All the men participate in the washing, and
this rite is intended to make the canoe fast, by removing the traces of
any evil influence, which might still have remained, in spite of the
previous magic, performed on the waga. After the waga has been rubbed
and washed, it is pulled ashore again and placed on the skid logs.
Now the natives proceed to the main and most important constructive
part of their work; this consists of the erection of the gunwale
planks at the sides of the dug-out log, so as to form the deep and
wide well of the built-up canoe. They are kept in position by an
internal framework of some twelve to twenty pairs of ribs, and all
of this is lashed together with a special creeper called wayugo,
and the holes and interstices are caulked with a resinous substance.
I cannot enter here into details of building, though from the
technological point of view, this is the most interesting phase,
showing us the native at grips with real problems of construction. He
has a whole array of component parts, and he must make them fit
together with a considerable degree of precision, and that without
having any exact means of measurement. By a rough appreciation based on
long experience and great skill, he estimates the relative shapes and
sizes of the planks, the angles and dimensions of the ribs, and the
lengths of the various poles. Then, in shaping them out, the builder
tests and fits them in a preliminary manner as work goes on, and as a
rule the result is good. But now, when all these component parts have
to be pieced finally together, it nearly always happens that some bit
or other fails to fit properly with the rest. These details have to
be adjusted, a bit taken off the body of the canoe, a plank or pole
shortened, or even a piece added. The natives have a very efficient
way of lashing on a whole bit of a plank, if this proves too short,
or if, by some accident, it breaks at the end. After all has been
finally fitted, and made to tally, the framework of ribs is put into
the canoe (see Plate XXVII), and the natives proceed to lash them to
the body of the dug-out, and to the two longitudinal poles to which
the ribs are threaded.
And now a few words must be said about the wayugo, the lashing
creeper. Only one species of creeper is used for the lashing of boats,
and it is of the utmost importance that this creeper should be sound
and strong. It is this alone that maintains the cohesion of the various
parts, and in rough weather, very much depends on how the lashings
will stand the strain. The other parts of the canoe--the outrigger
poles--can be more easily tested, and as they are made of strong,
elastic wood, they usually stand any weather quite well. Thus the
element of danger and uncertainty in a canoe is due mainly to the
creeper. No wonder, therefore, that the magic of the creeper is
considered as one of the most important ritual items in canoe-building.
In fact, wayugo, the name of that creeper species, is also used as
a general term for canoe magic. When a man has the reputation of
building or owning a good and fast canoe, the usual way of explaining
it is to say that he has, or knows "a good wayugo." For, as in all
other magic, there are several types of wayugo spells. The ritual is
always practically the same: five coils of the creeper are, on the
previous day, placed on a large wooden dish and chanted over in the
owner's hut by himself. Only exceptionally can this magic be done by
the builder. Next day they are brought to the beach ceremonially on
the wooden plate. In one of the wayugo systems, there is an additional
rite, in which the toliwaga (canoe owner) takes a piece of the creeper,
inserts it into one of the holes pierced in the rim of the dug-out for
the lashing, and pulling it to and fro, recites once more the spell.
In consideration of the importance of this magic, the formula will
be here adduced in full. It consists of an exordium (u'ula), a double
main part (tapwana), and a concluding period (dogina). []
WAYUGO SPELL.
In the u'ula he first repeats "Sacred (or ritual) eating of fish,
sacred inside," thus alluding to a belief that the toliwaga
has in connection with this magic to partake ritually of baked
fish. Then come the words--"Flutter, betel plant, leaving behind,"
all associated with leading ideas of canoe magic--the flutter of
pandanus streamers; the betel-nut, which the ancestral spirits
in other rites are invited to partake of; the speed by which all
comrades will be left behind!
A list of ancestral names follows. Two of them, probably
mythical personages, have significative names; "Stormy sea" and
"Foaming." Then the baloma (spirits) of these ancestors are asked
to sit on the canoe slips and to chew betel, and they are invoked
to take the pandanus streamer of the Kudayuri--a place in Kitava,
where the flying canoe magic originated--and plant it on top of
Teula or Tewara, the small island off the East coast of Fergusson.
The magician after that chants: "I shall turn, I shall turn
towards you, O men of Kitava, you remain behind on the To'uru
beach (in the Lagoon of Vakuta). Before you lies the sea arm of
Pilolu. To-day, they kindle the festive fire of the Kudayuri, thou,
O my boat" (here the personal name of the boat is uttered), "bind
thy skirts together and fly!" In this passage--which is almost
identical with one in the previously quoted Ligogu spell--there
is a direct allusion to the Kudayuri myth, and to the custom of
festive fires. Again the canoe is addressed as a woman who has to
bind her grass petticoat together during her flight, a reference
to the belief that a flying witch binds her skirts when starting
into the air and to the tradition that this myth originates from
Na'ukuwakula, one of the flying Kudayuri sisters. The following
main part continues with this mythical allusion: Na'ukuwakula
flew from Kitava through Sinaketa and Kayleula to Simsim, where
she settled down and transmitted the magic to her progeny. In
this spell the three places: Kuyawa (a creek and hillock near
Sinaketa), Dikutuwa (a rock near Kayleula), and La'u (a cleft
rock in the sea near Simsim, in the Lousançay Islands) are the
leading words of the tapwana.
The last sentence of the first part, forming a transition into
the tapwana, runs as follows: "I shall grasp the handle of the
adze, I shall grip all the component parts of the canoe"--perhaps
another allusion to the mythical construction of the Kudayuri canoe
(comp. Chap. XII, Div. IV)--"I shall fly on the top of Kuyawa,
I shall disappear; dissolve in mist, in smoke; become like a wind
eddy, become alone--on top of Kuyawa." The same words are then
repeated, substituting for Kuyawa the two other above-mentioned
spots, one after the other, and thus retracing the flight of
Na'ukuwakula.
Then the magician returns to the beginning and recites the
spell over again up to the phrase: "bind thy skirt together and
fly," which is followed this time by a second tapwana: "I shall
outdistance all my comrades with the bottom of my canoe; I shall
out-distance all my comrades with the prow-board of my canoe,
etc., etc.," repeating the prophetic boast with all the parts of
the canoe, as is usual in the middle part of magical spells.
In the dogina, the last part, the magician addresses the waga
in mythological terms, with allusions to the Kudayuri myth, and
adds: "Canoe thou art a ghost, thou art like a wind eddy; vanish,
O my canoe, fly; break through your sea-passage of Kadimwatu,
cleave through the promontory of Saramwa, pass through Loma;
die away, disappear, vanish with an eddy, vanish with the mist;
make your imprint in the sand, cut through the seaweed, go,
put on your wreath of aromatic herbs." []
After the wayugo has been ritually brought in, the lashing of the
canoe begins. First of all the ribs are lashed into position then
the planks, and with this the body of the canoe is ready. This
takes a varying time, according to the number of people at work,
and to the amount of tallying and adjusting to be done at the final
fitting. Sometimes one whole day's work is spent on this stage,
and the next piece of work, the construction of the outrigger, has
to be postponed to another day. This is the next stage, and there is
no magic to punctuate the course of technical activities. The big,
solid log is put alongside the canoe, and a number of short, pointed
sticks are driven into it. The sticks are put in crossways on the top
of the float (lamina). Then the tops of these sticks are again attached
to a number of horizontal poles, which have to be thrust through one
side of the canoe-body, and attached to the other. All this naturally
requires again adjusting and fitting. When these sticks and poles are
bound together, there results a strong yet elastic frame, in which
the canoe and the float are held together in parallel positions,
and across them transversely there run the several horizontal poles
which keep them together. Next, these poles are bridged over by many
longitudinal sticks lashed together, and thus a platform is made
between the edge of the canoe and the tops of the float sticks.
When that is done, the whole frame of the canoe is ready, and there
remains only to caulk the holes and interstices. The caulking substance
is prepared in the hut of the toliwaga, and a spell is recited over
it on the evening before the work is begun. Then again, the whole
community turn out and do the work in one day's sitting.
The canoe is now ready for the sea, except for the painting, Which is
only for ornamentation. Three more magical rites have to be performed,
however, before it is painted and then launched. All three refer
directly to the canoe, and aim at giving it speed. At the same time all
three are exorcisms against evil influences, resulting from various
defilements or broken taboos, which possibly might have desecrated
the waga. The first is called Vakasulu, which means something like
"ritual cooking" of the canoe. The toliwaga has to prepare a real
witches' cauldron of all sorts of things, which afterwards are burnt
under the bottom of the canoe, and the smoke is supposed to exercise a
speed-giving and cleansing influence. The ingredients are: the wings
of a bat, the nest of a very small bird called posisiku, some dried
bracken leaves, a bit of cotton fluff, and some lalang grass. All
the substances are associated with flying and lightness. The wood
used for kindling the fire is that of the light-timbered mimosa tree
(liga). The twigs have to be obtained by throwing at the tree a
piece of wood (never a stone), and when the broken-off twig falls,
it must be caught in the hand, and not allowed to touch the ground.
The second rite, called Vaguri, is an exorcism only, and it consists
of charming a stick, and then knocking the body of the canoe all
over with it. This expels the evil witchery (bulubwalata), which
it is only wise to suspect has been cast by some envious rivals,
or persons jealous of the toliwaga.
Finally, the third of these rites, the Kaytapena waga, consists
in medicating a torch of coco-leaf with the appropriate spell, and
fumigating with it the inside of the canoe. This gives speed and once
more cleanses the canoe.
After another sitting of a few days, the whole outside of the canoe
is painted in three colours. Over each of them a special spell is
chanted again, the most important one over the black colour. This
is never omitted, while the red and white spells are optional. In
the rite of the black colour, again, a whole mixture of substances
is used--a dry bracken leaf, grass, and a posisiku nest--all this
is charred with some coco-nut husk, and the first strokes of the
black paint are made with the mixture. The rest is painted with a
watery mixture of charred coco-nut. For red colour, a sort of ochre,
imported from the d'Entrecasteaux Islands, is used; the white one is
made of a chalky earth, found in certain parts of the sea shore.
Sail-making is done on another day, usually in the village, by
communal labour, and, with a number of people helping, the tedious
and complicated work is performed in a relatively short time. The
triangular outline of the sail is first pegged out on the ground,
as a rule the old sail being used as a pattern. After this is done,
tapes of dried pandanus leaf (see Plates XXVIII, XXIX) are stretched
on the ground and first fixed along the borders of the sail. Then,
starting at the apex of the triangle, the sail-makers put tapes
radiating towards the base, sewing them together with awls of flying
fox bone, and using as thread narrow strips of specially toughened
pandanus leaf. Two layers of tapes are sewn one on top of the other
to make a solid fabric.
IV
The canoe is now quite ready to be launched. But before we go on to an
account of the ceremonial launching and the associated festivities,
one or two general remarks must be made retrospectively about the
proceedings just described.
The whole of the first stage of canoe-building, that is, the cutting
of the tree, the scooping out of the log, and the preparation of the
other component parts, with all their associated magic, is done only
when a new canoe is built.
But the second stage has to be performed over all the canoes before
every great overseas Kula expedition. On such an occasion, all
the canoes have to be re-lashed, re-caulked, and re-painted. This
obviously requires that they should all be taken to pieces and then
lashed, caulked and painted exactly as is done with a new canoe. All
the magic incidental to these three processes is then performed, in
its due order, over the renovated canoe. So that we can say about the
second stage of canoe-building that not only is it always performed
in association with the Kula, but that no big expedition ever takes
place without it.
We have had a description of the magical rites, and the ideas which are
implied in every one of them have been specified. But there are one or
two more general characteristics which must be mentioned here. First,
there is what could be called the "ceremonial dimension" of magical
rites. That is, how far is the performance of the rite attended by
the members of the community, if at all; and if so, do they actively
take part in it, or do they simply pay keen attention and behave as
an interested audience; or, though being present, do they pay little
heed and show only small interest?
In the first stage of canoe-building, the rites are performed by the
magician himself, with only a few helpers in attendance. The general
village public do not feel sufficiently interested and attracted to
assist, nor are they bound by custom to do so. The general character
of these rites is more like the performance of a technicality of work
than of a ceremony. The preparing of herbs for the ligogu magic, for
instance, and the charming it over, is carried out in a matter-of-fact,
businesslike manner, and nothing in the behaviour of the magician
and those casually grouped around him would indicate that anything
specially interesting in the routine work is happening.
The rites of the second stage are ipso facto attended by all those who
help in piecing together and lashing, but on the whole those present
have no special task assigned to them in the performance of these
rites. As to the attention and behaviour during the performance of the
magic, much depends of course on whether the magician officiating is
a chief of great importance or someone of low rank. A certain decorum
and even silence would be observed in any case. But many of those
present would turn aside and go away, if they wanted to do so. The
magician does not produce the impression of an officiating high priest
performing a solemn ceremony, but rather of a specialised workman
doing a particularly important piece of work. It must be remembered
that all the rites are simple, and the chanting of the spells in
public is done in a low voice, and quickly, without any specially
effective vocal production. Again, the caulking and the wayugo rites
are, in some types of magic at least, performed in the magician's hut,
without any attendance whatever, and so is that of the black paint.
Another point of general importance is what could be called the
stringency of magic rites. In canoe magic, for instance, the expulsion
of the tokway, the ritual cutting of the pulling rope, the magic of the
adze (ligogu), that of the lashing creeper (wayugo), of the caulking,
and of the black paint can never be omitted. Whereas the other
rites are optional, though as a rule some of them are performed. But
even those which are considered indispensable do not all occupy the
same place of importance in native mythology and in native ideas,
which is clearly expressed in the behaviour of the natives and their
manner of speaking of them. Thus, the general term for canoe magic is
either wayugo or ligogu, from which we can see that these two spells
are considered the most important. A man will speak about his wayugo
being better than that of the other, or of having learnt his ligogu
from his father. Again, as we shall see in the canoe myth, both these
rites are explicitly mentioned there. Although the expulsion of the
tokway is always done, it is definitely recognised by the natives as
being of lesser importance. So are also the magic of caulking and of
the black paint.
A less general point, of great interest, however, is that of evil
magic (bulubwalata) and of broken taboos. I had to mention several
exorcisms against those influences, and something must be said about
them here. The term bulubwalata covers all forms of evil magic or
witchery. There is that which, directed against pigs, makes them
run away from their owners into the bush; there is bulubwalata for
alienating the affections of a wife or sweetheart; there is evil magic
against gardens, and--perhaps the most dreaded one--evil magic against
rain, producing drought and famine. The evil magic against canoes,
making them slow, heavy, and unseaworthy, is also much feared. Many
men profess to know it, but it is very difficult for the Ethnographer
to obtain a formula, and I succeeded only in taking down one. It is
always supposed to be practised by canoe-owners upon the craft which
they regard as dangerous rivals of their own.
There are many taboos referring to an already constructed canoe, and we
shall meet with them later when speaking about sailing and handling
the canoe. But before that stage is reached, any defilement with
any unclean substance of the log out of which the canoe is scooped,
would make it slow and bad; or if anybody were to walk over a canoe
log or stand on it there would be the same evil result.
One more point must be mentioned here. As we have seen, the first
magical rite, of the second stage of construction, is performed
over the prow-boards. The question obtrudes itself as to whether
the designs on these boards have any magical meaning. It must be
clearly understood that any guesswork or speculations about origins
must be rigidly excluded from ethnographic field work like this. For
a sociologically empirical answer, the Ethnographer must look to two
classes of facts. First of all, he may directly question the natives as
to whether the prow-boards themselves or any of the motives upon them
are done for magical purposes. Whether he questions the average man, or
even the specialist in canoe magic and carving, to this he will always
receive in Kiriwina a negative answer. He can then enquire whether
in the magical ritual for formulæ there are no references to the
prow-boards, or to any of the decorative motives on them. Here also,
the evidence on the whole is negative. In one spell perhaps, and that
belonging not to canoe but to the Kula magic (comp. below, Chap. XIII,
Div. II, the Kayikuna Tabuyo spell), there can be found an allusion
to the prow-boards, but only to the term describing them in general,
and not to any special decorative motive. Thus the only association
between canoe decoration and canoe magic consists in the fact that
two magical rites are performed over them, one mentioned already,
and the other to be mentioned at the beginning of the next chapter.
The description of canoe-building, in fact, all the data given in
this chapter, refer only to one of the two types of sea-going canoe
to be found in the Kula district. For the natives of the Eastern half
of the ring use craft bigger, and in certain respects better, than
the masawa. The main difference between the Eastern and Western type
consists in the fact that the bigger canoes have a higher gunwale or
side, and consequently a greater carrying capacity, and they can be
immersed deeper. The larger water board offers more resistance against
making leeway, and this allows the canoes to be sailed closer to the
wind. Consequently, the Eastern canoes can beat, and these natives
are therefore much more independent of the direction of the wind
in their sailings. With this is connected the position of the mast,
which in this type is stepped in the middle, and it is also permanently
fixed, and is not taken down every time after sailing. It obviously,
therefore, need not be changed in its position every time the canoe
goes on another tack.
I have not seen the construction of a nagega, as these canoes are
called, but I think that it is technically a much more difficult
task than the building of a masawa. I was told that both magic and
ceremonial of construction are very much the same in the building of
both canoes.
The nagega, that is the larger and more seaworthy type, is used on the
section of the Kula ring beginning in Gawa and ending in Tubetube. It
is also used in certain parts of the Massim district, which lie outside
the Kula ring, such as the Island of Sud-Est, and surrounding smaller
islands, and it is used among the Southern Massim of the mainland. But
though its use is very widely spread, its manufacture is confined to
only a few places. The most important centres of nagega building are
Gawa, a few villages on Woodlark Islands, the island of Panayati,
and perhaps one or two places on Misima. From there, the canoes are
traded all over the district, and indeed this is one of the most
important forms of trade in this part of the world. The masawa canoes
are used and manufactured in the district of Dobu, in the Amphletts,
in the Trobriands, in Kitava and Iwa.
One point of great importance in the relation of these two forms
of canoe is that one of them has, within the last two generations,
been expanding at the expense of the other. According to reliable
information, gathered at several points in the Trobriands and the
Amphletts, the nagega type, that is the heavier, more seaworthy and
better-sailing canoe, was driven out some time ago from the Amphletts
and Trobriands. The masawa, in many respects inferior, but less
difficult to build, and swifter, has supplanted the bigger type. In
olden days, that is, about two or three generations ago, the nagega
was used exclusively in Iwa, Kitava, Kiriwina, Vakuta, and Sinaketa,
while the Amphlettans and the natives of Kayleula would usually use
the nagega, though sometimes they would sail in masawa canoes. Dobu
was the real home and headquarters of the masawa. When the shifting
began, and when it was completed, I could not ascertain. But the fact
is that nowadays even the villages of Kitava and Iwa manufacture the
smaller masawa canoe. Thus, one of the most important cultural items
is spreading from South to North. There is, however, one point on
which I could not obtain definite information: that is, whether in
the Trobriands the nagega in olden days was imported from Kitava,
or whether it was manufactured locally by imported craftsmen (as is
done even nowadays in Kiriwina at times), or whether the Trobrianders
themselves knew how to make the big canoes. There is no doubt, however,
that in olden days, the natives of Kitava and Iwa used themselves to
make the nagega canoes. The Kudayuri myth (see Chapter XII), and the
connected magic, refer to this type of canoe. Thus in this district
at any rate, and probably in the Trobriands and Amphletts as well,
not only the use, but also the manufacture of the bigger canoe has
been superseded by that of the smaller one, the masawa, now found in
all these parts.