THE FIRST HALT OF THE FLEET ON MUWA


I

After so many preparations and preliminaries, we might expect that,
once embarked, the natives would make straight for the high mountains,
which beckon them alluringly from the distant South. Quite on the
contrary, they are satisfied with a very short stage the first day,
and after sailing a few miles, they stop on a big sand bank called
Muwa, lying to the southwest of the village of Sinaketa. Here, near
the sandy shore, edged with old, gnarled trees, the canoes are moored
by sticks, while the crews prepare for a ceremonial distribution of
food, and arrange their camp for the night on the beach.

This somewhat puzzling delay is less incomprehensible, if we reflect
that the natives, after having prepared for a distant expedition, now
at last for the first time find themselves together, separated from the
rest of the villagers. A sort of mustering and reviewing of forces,
as a rule associated with a preliminary feast held by the party,
is characteristic of all the expeditions or visits in the Trobriands.

I have spoken already about big and small expeditions, but I have
not perhaps made quite clear that the natives themselves make a
definite distinction between big, competitive Kula expeditions, called
uvalaku, and sailings on a smaller scale, described as 'just Kula,'
("Kula wala"). The uvalaku are held every two or three years from
each district, though nowadays, as in everything else, the natives
are getting slack. One would be held, whenever there is a great
agglomeration of vaygu'a, due to reasons which I shall describe
later on. Sometimes, a special event, such as the possession by
one of the head men of an exceptionally fine pig, or of an object
of high value, might give rise to an uvalaku. Thus, in 1918, a big
competitive expedition (uvalaku) from Dobu was held ostensibly for
the reason that Kauyaporu, one of the head men of Tu'utauna, owned a
very large boar with tusks almost curling over into a circle. Again,
plenty of food, or in olden days the completion of a successful war
expedition, would form the raison d'être of an uvalaku. Of course
these reasons, explicitly given by the natives, are, so to speak,
accessory causes, for in reality an uvalaku would be held whenever
its turn came, that is, barring great scarcity of food or the death
of an important personage.

The uvalaku is a Kula expedition on an exceptionally big scale,
carried on with a definite social organisation under scrupulous
observance of all ceremonial and magical rites, and distinguished
from the smaller expeditions by its size, by a competitive element,
and by one or two additional features. On an uvalaku, all the canoes
in the district will sail, and they will sail fully manned. Everybody
will be very eager to take part in it. Side by side with this natural
desire, however, there exists the idea that all the members of the
crews are under an obligation to go on the expedition. This duty they
owe to the chief, or master of the uvalaku. The toli'uvalaku, as he
is called, is always one of the sectional chiefs or headmen. He plays
the part of a master of ceremonies, on leaving the beach of Sinaketa,
at the distributions of food, on arrival in the overseas villages,
and on the ceremonial return home. A streamer of dried and bleached
pandanus leaf, attached to the prows of his canoe on a stick, is the
ostensible sign of the dignity. Such a streamer is called tarabauba'u
in Kiriwinian, and doya in the Dobuan language. The headman, who
is toli'uvalaku on an expedition, will as a rule receive more Kula
gifts than the others. On him also will devolve the glory of this
particular expedition. Thus the title of toli, in this case, is one
of honorary and nominal ownership, resulting mainly in renown (butura)
for its bearer, and as such highly valued by the natives.

From the economic and legal point of view, however, the obligation
binding the members of the expedition to him is the most important
sociological feature. He gives the distribution of food, in which the
others participate, and this imposes on them the duty of carrying out
the expedition, however hard this might be, however often they would
have to stop or even return owing to bad weather, contrary winds,
or, in olden days, interference by hostile natives. As the natives say,


    "We cannot return on uvalaku, for we have eaten of the pig,
    and we have chewed of the betel-nut given by the toli'uvalaku."


Only after the most distant community with whom the Sinaketans
kula has been reached, and after due time has been allowed for the
collection of any vaygu'a within reach, will the party start on the
return journey. Concrete cases are quoted in which expeditions had
to start several times from Sinaketa, always returning within a few
days after all the provisions had been eaten on Muwa, from where a
contrary wind would not allow the canoes to move south. Or again,
a memorable expedition, some few decades ago, started once or twice,
was becalmed in Vakuta, had to give a heavy payment to a wind magician
in the village of Okinai, to provide them with a propitious northerly
wind, and then, sailing South at last, met with a vineylida, one of the
dreadful perils of the sea, a live stone which jumps from the bottom
of the sea at a canoe. But in spite of all this, they persevered,
reached Dobu in safety, and made a successful return.

Thus we see that, from a sociological point of view, the uvalaku is
an enterprise partially financed by the toli'uvalaku, and therefore
redounding to his credit, and bringing him honour; while the obligation
imposed on others by the food distributed to them, is to carry on
the expedition to a successful end.

It is rather puzzling to find that, although everyone is eager for
the expedition, although they all enjoy it equally and satisfy
their ambition and increase their wealth by it, yet the element
of compulsion and obligation is introduced into it; for we are not
accustomed to the idea of pleasure having to be forced on people. None
the less, the uvalaku is not an isolated feature, for in almost
all tribal enjoyments and festive entertainments on a big scale,
the same principle obtains. The master of the festivities, by an
initial distribution of food, imposes an obligation on the others,
to carry through dancing, sports, or games of the season. And indeed,
considering the ease with which native enthusiasms flag, with which
jealousies, envies and quarrels creep in, and destroy the unanimity
of social amusements, the need for compulsion from without to amuse
oneself appears not so preposterous as at first sight.

I have said that an uvalaku expedition is distinguished from an
ordinary one, in so far also as the full ceremonial of the Kula has to
be observed. Thus all the canoes must be either new or relashed, and
without exception they must be also repainted and redecorated. The full
ceremonial launching, tasasoria, and the presentation, kabigodoya,
are carried out with every detail only when the Kula takes the
form of an uvalaku. The pig or pigs killed in the village before
departure are also a special feature of the competitive Kula. So is
the kayguya'u ceremonial distribution held on Muwa, just at the point
of the proceedings at which we have now arrived. The tanarere, a big
display of vaygu'a and comparison of the individual acquisitions at the
end of an expedition, is another ceremonial feature of the uvalaku and
supplies some of the competitive element. There is also competition as
to the speed, qualities and beauties of the canoes at the beginning of
such an expedition. Some of the communities who present their vaygu'a
to an uvalaku expedition vie with one another, as to who will give
most, and in fact the element of emulation or competition runs right
through the proceedings. In the following chapters, I shall have,
in several more points, occasion to distinguish an uvalaku from an
ordinary Kula sailing.

It must be added at once that, although all these ceremonial features
are compulsory only on an uvalaku sailing, and although only then
are they one and all of them unfailingly observed, some and even all
may also be kept during an ordinary Kula expedition, especially if it
happens to be a somewhat bigger one. The same refers to the various
magical rites--that is to say the most important ones--which although
performed on every Kula expedition, are carried out with more punctilio
on an uvalaku.

Finally, a very important distinctive feature is the rule, that no
vaygu'a can be carried on the outbound sailing of an uvalaku. It must
not be forgotten that a Kula overseas expedition sails, in order mainly
to receive gifts and not to give them, and on an uvalaku this rule is
carried to its extreme, so that no Kula valuables whatever may be given
by the visiting party. The natives sailing from Sinaketa to Dobu on
ordinary Kula may carry a few armshells with them, but when they sail
on a ceremonial competitive uvalaku, no armshell is ever taken. For
it must be remembered that Kula exchanges, as has been explained in