IN TEWARA AND SANAROA--MYTHOLOGY OF THE KULA


I

At daybreak the party leave the Amphletts. This is the stage when
the parting gifts, the talo'i are given. The clay pots, the several
kinds of produce of the islands and of the Koya, which had been laid
aside the previous day, are now brought to the canoes (see Plate
XLVII). Neither the giver nor the main receiver, the toliwaga, take
much notice of the proceedings, great nonchalance about give and take
being the correct attitude prescribed by good manners. Children bring
the objects, and the junior members of the crew stow them away. The
general behaviour of the crowds, ashore and in the canoes, is as
unostentatious at this moment of parting as it was at the arrival. No
more farewells than greetings are spoken or shouted, nor are there
any visible or formal signs of grief, or of hope of meeting again,
or of any other emotions. The busy, self-absorbed crews push off
stolidly, step the mast, set sail, and glide away.

They now approach the broad front of Koyatabu, which with a favourable
wind, they might reach within two hours or so. They probably sail near
enough to get a clear view of the big trees standing on the edge of
the jungle, and of the long waterfall dividing the mountain's flank
right down the middle; of the triangular patches under cultivation,
covered with the vine of yams and big leaves of taro. They could also
perceive here and there smoke curling out of the jungle where, hidden
under the trees, there lies a village, composed of a few miserable
huts. Nowadays these villages have come down to the water's edge,
in order to supplement their garden yield with fish. In olden days
they were all high up on the slope, and their huts hardly ever visible
from the sea.

The inhabitants of these small and ramshackle villages are shy and
timid, though in olden days they would have been dangerous to the
Trobrianders. They speak a language which differs from that of Dobu
and is usually called by the natives 'the Basima talk.' There seem to
be about four or five various languages on the island of Fergusson,
besides that of Dobu. My acquaintance with the Basima natives is
very small, due only to two forced landings in their district. They
struck me as being physically of a different type from the Dobuans,
though this is only an impression. They have got no boats, and do the
little sailing they require on small rafts of three or five logs tied
together. Their houses are smaller and less well-made than those in
Dobu. Further investigation of these natives would be very interesting,
and probably also very difficult, as is always the case when studying
very small communities, living at the same time right out of touch
with any white man.

This land must remain, for the present anyhow, veiled for ourselves,
as it also is for the Trobriand natives. For these, indeed, the few
attempts which they occasionally made to come into contact with these
natives, and the few mishaps which brought them to their shores,
were all far from encouraging in results, and only strengthened the
traditional superstitious fear of them. Several generations ago, a
canoe or two from Burakwa, in the island of Kayeula, made an exploring
trip to the district of Gabu, lying in a wide bay under the North-West
flank of Koyatabu. The natives of Gabu, receiving them at first with a
show of interest, and pretending to enter into commercial relations,
afterwards fell on them treacherously and slew the chief Toraya and
all his companions. This story has become famous, and indeed one of the
outstanding historical events of the Trobriands, because Tomakam, the
slain chief's younger brother, went to the Koya of Gabu, and killed the
head man of one of the villages, avenging thus his brother's death. He
then composed a song and a dance which is performed to this day in
Kiriwina, and has indeed one of the finest melodies in the islands.

This is the verbatim account of the story as it was told to me by
To'uluwa himself, the chief of Omarakana, who at present 'owns' this
Gumagabu dance, his ancestors having acquired it from the descendants
of Tomakam by a laga payment. [73] It is a commentary to the song,
and begins only with the avenging expedition of Tomakam, which is
also the theme of the song.


                         THE STORY OF GUMAGABU

    "Tomakam got a new waga. He blew the conch shell and went to
    the Koya. He spoke to his mother" (that is, before leaving), "'My
    mother, you remain, I shall sail. One conch shell you hear, it will
    be a conch shell of a necklace.'" (That is, it will be a sign that
    he has been successful in getting a good Kula necklace). "'The
    second conch shell will be the conch shell of the dead man; the
    sign that I have already carried out my revenge. I shall sail, I
    shall anchor, I shall sleep. The second day I shall sail, I shall
    anchor, I shall sleep. The third day I shall anchor in a village,
    having already arrived in the Mountain. The fourth day I shall give
    pari, the Kinana (the Southern foreigner) will come, I shall hit
    him. The fifth day I shall return. I shall sail fast, till night
    grows on the sea. The next day I shall anchor at Burakwa. You
    hear the conch shell, you sleep in the house, arise. One blow you
    hear of the shell--the blow of the bagi (necklace). Two blows you
    hear, the blow of the dead man! Then the men of Burakwa will say:
    'Two conch shells, two necklaces,' then, you come out of the house,
    you speak: 'Men of Burakwa, from one side of the village and from
    the other; indeed you mocked my son, Tomakam. Your speech was--go,
    carry out thy vendetta in Gabu. The first conch shell is that of
    the necklace, the second conch shell is that of the dead man. I
    have spoken!'" (Here ends the speech of Tomakam to his mother.)

    "He anchored in the village in the Koya. He told his younger
    brother: 'Go, tell the Kinana men these words: Your friend has
    a sore leg, well, if we together go to the canoe he will give
    the pari!' The younger brother went and spoke those words to the
    headman of the Kinana: 'Some green coco-nuts, some betel-nut, some
    pig, bring this to us and we shall give you pari. Your arm-shells,
    your big stone blade, your boar's tusk, your whale-bone spatula
    await you in the canoe. The message for you is that your friend
    has a sore leg and cannot walk.' Says the Kinana man: 'Well,
    let us go!'"

    "He caught a pig, he collected betel-nut, sugar cane, bananas,
    necklaces, betel-pod, he said: 'Well, let us go together to the
    canoe.' Pu'u he gives the necklace; pu'u, the pig; then he gave
    the coco-nut, the betel-nut, the sugar cane, the bananas. Tomakam
    lay on one side; his leg he wrapped up in a white, soft pandanus
    mat. Before he had spoken to his younger brother": (i.e., he gave
    him this instruction also, when he sent him to meet the people of
    Gabu): "'You all come with the Kinana man. Do not remain in the
    village.' Then" (after the first gifts were exchanged) "the Kinana
    man stood up in the canoe. His betel-pod fell down. Spoke Tomakam,
    addressing the Kinana man: 'My friend, pick up the betel-pod. It
    fell and went down into the canoe.' The Kinana man bent down,
    he took the betel-pod. Tomakam saw that the Kinana bent down,
    he took an axe, and sitting he made a stroke at him. He cut off
    his neck. Then Tomakam took the head, threw the body into the
    sea. The head he stuck on a stick of his canoe. They sailed, they
    arrived in their village. He caught a pig, prepared a taro pudding,
    cut sugar cane, they had a big feast, he invented this song."


Such was the story told me by the chief of Omarakana about the song
and dance of Gumagabu, which at that time they were singing and
performing in his village. I have adduced it in full, in an almost
literal translation from the native text, in order to show it side by
side with the song. The narrative thus reproduced shows characteristic
gaps, and it does not cover even the incidents of the song.

The following is a free translation of the song, which, in its
original native text, is very condensed and impressionistic. A word
or two indicates rather than describes whole scenes and incidents,
and the traditional commentary, handed on in a native community side
by side with the song, is necessary for a full understanding.


                           THE GUMAGABU SONG

        I

        The stranger of Gumagabu sits on the top of the mountain.
        'Go on top of the mountain, the towering mountain....'
        ----They cry for Toraya...----
        The stranger of Gumagabu sits on the slope of the mountain.
        ----The fringe of small clouds lifts above Boyowa;
        The mother cries for Toraya----
        'I shall take my revenge.'
        The mother cries for Toraya.


        II

        Our mother, Dibwaruna, dreams on the mat.
        She dreams about the killing.
        'Revenge the wailing;
        Anchor; hit the Gabu strangers!'
        ----The stranger comes out;
        The chief gives him the pari;
        'I shall give you the doga;
        Bring me things from the mountain to the canoe!'


        III

        We exchange our vaygu'a;
        The rumour of my arrival spreads through the Koya
        We talk and talk.
        He bends and is killed.
        His companions run away;
        His body is thrown into the sea;
        The companions of the Kinana run away,
        We sail home.


        IV

        Next day, the sea foams up,
        The chief's canoe stops on the reef;
        The storm approaches;
        The chief is afraid of drowning.
        The conch shell is blown:
        It sounds in the mountain.
        They all weep on the reef.


        V

        They paddle in the chief's canoe;
        They circle round the point of Bewara.
        'I have hung my basket.
        I have met him.'
        So cries the chief,
        So cries repeatedly the chief.


        VI

        Women in festive decoration
        Walk on the beach.
        Nawaruva puts on her turtle rings;
        She puts on her luluga'u skirt.
        In the village of my fathers, in Burakwa,
        There is plenty of food;
        Plenty is brought in for distribution.


The character of this song is extremely elliptic, one might even say
futuristic, since several scenes are crowded simultaneously into the
picture. In the first strophe we see the Kinana, by which word all
the tribesmen from the d'Entrecasteaux Archipelago are designated in
Boyowa, on the top of his Mountain in Gabu. Immediately afterwards, we
are informed of the intentions of Tomakam to ascend the mountain, while
the women cry for Toraya, for the slain chief--probably his kinswomen
and widows. The next picture again spans over the wide seas, and on
the one shore we see the Gabuan sitting on the slopes of his hill and
far away on the other, under the fringe of small clouds lifting above
Boyowa, the mother cries for her son, the murdered chief. Tomakam
takes a resolve, 'I shall take my revenge,' hearing her cry.

In the second strophe, the mother dreams about the expedition; the
words about revenge to be taken on the Gabu men and the directions to
anchor and hit him are probably taken from her dream. Then suddenly we
are transported right across to the mountain, the expedition having
arrived there already. The strangers, the Kinana are coming down to
the canoe, and we assist at the words spoken between them and the
people of Buakwa.

Then in the third strophe, we arrive at the culminating scene of
the drama; even here, however, the hero, who is also his own bard,
could not help introducing a few boastful words about his renown
resounding in the Koya. In a few words the tragedy is described:
the Kinana bends down, is killed, and his body is thrown into the
water. About his head we hear nothing in this verse.

In the next one, a storm overtakes the returning party. Signals of
distress are re-echoed by the mountain, and like Homeric heroes, our
party are not ashamed to weep in fear and anguish. Somehow they escape,
however, and in the next verse, they are already near their village and
Tomakam, their leader, bursts into a pæan of triumph. It is not quite
clear what the allusion to the basket means, whether he keeps there his
Kula trophies or the slain enemy's head; this latter, in contradiction
to what we heard in the prose story of its being impaled. The song ends
with a description of a feast. The woman mentioned there is Tomakam's
daughter, who puts on festive attire in order to welcome her father.

Comparing now the song with the story, we see that they do not
quite tally. In the story, there is the dramatic interest of the
mother's intervention. We gather from it that Tomakam, goaded by
the aspersions of his fellow-villagers, wishes to make his return
as effective as possible. He arranges the signals of the two conch
shell blasts with his mother, and asks her to harangue the people
at the moment of his return. All this finds no expression in the
song. The ruse of the chief's sore leg is also omitted from there,
which, however, does not mean that the hero was ashamed of it. On
the other hand, the storm described in the song is omitted from the
story, and there is a discrepancy about the head of the Gabu man,
and we do not know whether it really is conveyed in a basket as the
song has it or impaled, as the story relates!

I have adduced in detail the story and the song, because they are a
good illustration of the native's attitude towards the dangers, and
towards the heroic romance of the Koya. They are also interesting as
documents, showing which salient points would strike the natives'
imagination in such a dramatic occurrence. Both in the story
and in the song, we find emphasised the motives of social duty,
of satisfied self-regard and ambition; again, the dangers on the
reef, the subterfuge in killing, finally the festivities on return
home. Much that would interest us in the whole story is omitted,
as anyone can see for himself.

Other stories, though not made illustrious through being set into a
song, are told about the Koya. I met myself an old man in the island
of Vakuta, who, as a boy, had been captured with a whole party by a
village community of Dobu-speaking people on Normanby Island. The men
and another small boy of the party were killed and eaten, but some
women took pity on him, and he was spared, to be brought up amongst
them. There is another man, either alive or recently dead in Kavataria,
who had a similar experience in Fergusson Island. Another man called
Kaypoyla, from the small island of Kuyawa in the Western Trobriands,
was stranded with his crew somewhere in the West of Fergusson Island,
but not in the district where they used to trade. His companions
were killed and eaten. He was taken alive and kept to fatten for a
proximate feast. His host, or rather the host of the feast in which
he was going to furnish the pièce de résistence, was away inland,
to invite the guests, while the host's wife went for a moment
behind the house, sweeping the ground. Kaypoyla jumped up and ran
to the shore. Being chased by some other men from the settlement,
he concealed himself in the branches of a big tree standing on the
beach, and was not found by his pursuers. At night he came down, took
a canoe or a raft, and paddled along the coast. He used to sleep on
shore during the night, and paddle on in day time. One night he slept
among some sago-palms, and, awakening in the morning, found himself,
to his terror, surrounded by Kinana men. What was his joyful surprise
after all, when he recognised among them his friend and Kula partner,
with whom he always used to trade! After some time, he was sent back
home in his partner's canoe.

Many such stories have a wide currency, and they supply one of
the heroic elements in tribal life, an element which now, with
the establishment of white man's influence, has vanished. Yet
even now the gloomy shores which our party are leaving to the
right, the tall jungle, the deep valleys, the hill-tops darkened
with trailing clouds, all this is a dim mysterious background,
adding to the awe and solemnity of the Kula, though not entering
into it. The sphere of activities of our traders lies at the foot
of the high mountains, there, where a chain of rocks and islands
lies scattered along the coast. Some of them are passed immediately
after leaving Gumasila. Then, after a good distance, a small rock,
called Gurewaya, is met, remarkable for the taboos associated with
it. Close behind it, two islands, Tewara and Uwama, are separated
by a narrow passage, the mythical straits of Kadimwatu. There is a
village on the first-mentioned, and the natives of this make gardens
on both islands. The village is not very big; it may have some sixty
to eighty inhabitants, as it can man three canoes for the Kula. It
has no commercial or industrial importance, but is notable because
of its mythological associations. This island is the home of the
mythological hero, Kasabwaybwayreta, whose story is one of the most
important legends of the Kula. Here indeed, in Tewara, we are right
within the mythological heart of the Kula. In fact, we entered its
legendary area with the moment the Sinaketan fleet sailed out of the
Lagoon into the deep waters of Pilolu.




II

Once more we must pause, this time in an attempt to grasp the
natives' mental attitude towards the mythological aspect of the
Kula. Right through this account it has been our constant endeavour
to realise the vision of the world, as it is reflected in the minds
of the natives. The frequent references to the scenery have not been
given only to enliven the narrative, or even to enable the reader
to visualise the setting of the native customs. I have attempted to
show how the scene of his actions appears actually to the native,
to describe his impressions and feelings with regard to it, as I was
able to read them in his folk-lore, in his conversations at home,
and in his behaviour when passing through this scenery itself.

Here we must try to reconstruct the influence of myth upon this
vast landscape, as it colours it, gives it meaning, and transforms
it into something live and familiar. What was a mere rock, now
becomes a personality; what was a speck on the horizon becomes a
beacon, hallowed by romantic associations with heroes; a meaningless
configuration of landscape acquires a significance, obscure no doubt,
but full of intense emotion. Sailing with natives, especially with
novices to the Kula, I often observed how deep was their interest
in sections of landscape impregnated with legendary meaning, how the
elder ones would point and explain, the younger would gaze and wonder,
while the talk was full of mythological names. It is the addition of
the human interest to the natural features, possessing in themselves
less power of appealing to a native man than to us, which makes the
difference for him in looking at the scenery. A stone hurled by one of
the heroes into the sea after an escaping canoe; a sea passage broken
between two islands by a magical canoe; here two people turned into
rock; there a petrified waga--all this makes the landscape represent
a continuous story or else the culminating dramatic incident of
a familiar legend. This power of transforming the landscape, the
visible environment, is one only of the many influences which myth
exercises upon the general outlook of the natives. Although here we
are studying myth only in its connection with the Kula, even within
these narrow limits some of its broader connections will be apparent,
notably its influence upon sociology, magic and ceremonial.

The question which presents itself first, in trying to grasp the native
outlook on the subject is: what is myth to the natives? How do they
conceive and define it? Have they any line of demarcation between the
mythical and the actual reality, and if so, how do they draw this line?

Their folk-lore, that is, the verbal tradition, the store of tales,
legends, and texts handed on by previous generations, is composed of
the following classes: first of all, there is what the natives call
libogwo, 'old talk,' but which we would call tradition; secondly,
kukwanebu, fairy tales, recited for amusement, at definite seasons,
and relating avowedly untrue events; thirdly, wosi, the various
songs, and vinavina, ditties, chanted at play or under other
special circumstances; and last, not least, megwa or yopa, the
magical spells. All these classes are strictly distinguished from
one another by name, function, social setting, and by certain formal
characteristics. This brief outline of the Boyowan folk-lore in general
must suffice here, as we cannot enter into more details, and the only
class which interests us in the present connection is the first one,
that called libogwo.

This, the 'old talk,' the body of ancient tradition, believed to be
true, consists on the one hand of historical tales, such as the deeds
of past chiefs, exploits in the Koya, stories of shipwreck, etc. On
the other hand, the libogwo class also contains what the natives call
lili'u--myths, narratives, deeply believed by them, held by them in
reverence, and exercising an active influence on their conduct and
tribal life. Now the natives distinguish definitely between myth and
historic account, but this distinction is difficult to formulate,
and cannot be stated but in a somewhat deliberate manner.

First of all, it must be borne in mind, that a native would not
trouble spontaneously to analyse such distinctions and to put them
into words. If an Ethnographer succeeded in making the problem clear
to an intelligent informant (and I have tried and succeeded in doing
this) the native would simply state:


    "We all know that the stories about Tudava, about Kudayuri, about
    Tokosikuna, are lili'u; our fathers, our kadada (our maternal
    uncles) told us so; and we always hear these tales; we know them
    well; we know that there are no other tales besides them, which
    are lili'u. Thus, whenever we hear a story, we know whether it
    is a lili'u or not."


Indeed, whenever a story is told, any native, even a boy, would be
able to say whether this is one of his tribal lili'u or not. For the
other tales, that is the historical ones, they have no special word,
but they would describe the events as happening among 'humans like
ourselves.' Thus tradition, from which the store of tales is received,
hands them on labelled as lili'u, and the definition of a lili'u,
is that it is a story transmitted with such a label. And even this
definition is contained by the facts themselves, and not explicitly
stated by the natives in their current stock of expressions.

For us, however, even this is not sufficient, and we have to search
further, in order to see whether we cannot find other indices, other
characteristic features which differentiate the world of mythical
events from that of real ones. A reflection which would naturally
present itself would be this: "Surely the natives place their myths
in ancient, pre-historic times, while they put historical events
into recent ages?" There is some truth in this, in so far as most of
the historical events related by the natives are quite recent, have
occurred within the community where they are told and can be directly
connected with people and conditions existing at present, by memory
of living man, by genealogies or other records. On the other hand,
when historical events are told from other districts, and cannot be
directly linked with the present, it would be erroneous to imagine that
the natives place them into a definite compartment of time different
from that of the myth. For it must be realised that these natives do
not conceive of a past as of a lengthy duration, unrolling itself
in successive stages of time. They have no idea of a long vista of
historical occurrences, narrowing down and dimming as they recede
towards a distant background of legend and myth, which stands out
as something entirely different from the nearer planes. This view,
so characteristic of the naive, historical thinking among ourselves,
is entirely foreign to the natives. Whenever they speak of some event
of the past, they distinguish whether it happened within their own
memory or that of their fathers' or not. But, once beyond this line
of demarcation, all the past events are placed by them on one plane,
and there are no gradations of 'long ago' and 'very long ago.' Any
idea of epochs in time is absent from their mind; the past is one
vast storehouse of events, and the line of demarcation between myth
and history does not coincide with any division into definite and
distinct periods of time. Indeed, I have found very often that when
they told me some story of the past, for me obviously mythological,
they would deem it necessary to emphasise that this did not happen
in their fathers' time or in their grand-fathers' time, but long ago,
and that it is a lili'u.

Again, they have no idea of what could be called the evolution of
the world or the evolution of society; that is, they do not look back
towards a series of successive changes, which happened in nature or
in humanity, as we do. We, in our religious and scientific outlook
alike, know that earth ages and that humanity ages, and we think of
both in these terms; for them, both are eternally the same, eternally
youthful. Thus, in judging the remoteness of traditional events, they
cannot use the co-ordinates of a social setting constantly in change
and divided into epochs. To give a concrete example, in the myths of
Torosipupu and Tolikalaki, we saw them having the same interest and
concerns, engaged in the same type of fishing, using the same means
of locomotion as the present natives do. The mythical personages of
the natives' legends, as we shall presently see, live in the same
houses, eat the same food, handle the same weapons and implements as
those in use at present. Whereas in any of our historical stories,
legends or myths, we have a whole set of changed cultural conditions,
which allow us to co-ordinate any event with a certain epoch, and
which make us feel that a distant historical event, and still more,
a mythological one, is happening in a setting of cultural conditions
entirely different from those in which we are living now. In the
very telling of the stories of, let us say, Joan of Arc, Solomon,
Achilles, King Arthur, we have to mention all sorts of things and
conditions long since disappeared from among us, which make even a
superficial and an uneducated listener realise that it is a story of
a remote and different past.

I have said just now that the mythical personages in the Trobriand
tradition are living the same type of life, under the same social
and cultural conditions as the present natives. This needs one
qualification, and in this we shall find a very remarkable criterion
for a distinction between what is legendary and what is historical:
in the mythical world, although surrounding conditions were similar,
all sorts of events happened which do not happen nowadays, and people
were endowed with powers such as present men and their historical
ancestors do not possess. In mythical times, human beings come out of
the ground, they change into animals, and these become people again;
men and women rejuvenate and slough their skins; flying canoes speed
through the air, and things are transformed into stone.

Now this line of demarcation between the world of myth and that of
actual reality--the simple difference that in the former things happen
which never occur nowadays--is undoubtedly felt and realised by the
natives, though they themselves could not put it into words. They know
quite well that to-day no one emerges from underground; that people
do not change into animals, and vice versa; nor do they give birth to
them; that present-day canoes do not fly. I had the opportunity of
grasping their mental attitude towards such things by the following
occurrence. The Fijian missionary teacher in Omarakana was telling them
about white man's flying machines. They inquired from me, whether this
was true, and when I corroborated the Fijian's report and showed them
pictures of aeroplanes in an illustrated paper, they asked me whether
this happened nowadays or whether it were a lili'u. This circumstance
made it clear to me then, that the natives would have a tendency,
when meeting with an extraordinary and to them supernatural event,
either to discard it as untrue, or relegate it into the regions of the
lili'u. This does not mean, however, that the untrue and the mythical
are the same or even similar to them. Certain stories told to them,
they insist on treating as sasopa (lies), and maintain that they
are not lili'u. For instance, those opposed to missionary teaching
will not accept the view that Biblical stories told to them are a
lili'u, but they reject them as sasopa. Many a time did I hear such
a conservative native arguing thus:--


    "Our stories about Tudava are true; this is a lili'u. If you go
    to Laba'i you can see the cave in which Tudava was born, you can
    see the beach where he played as a boy. You can see his footmark
    in a stone at a place in the Raybwag. But where are the traces
    of Yesu Keriso? Who ever saw any signs of the tales told by the
    misinari? Indeed they are not lili'u."


To sum up, the distinction between the lili'u and actual or historical
reality is drawn firmly, and there is a definite cleavage between the
two. Prima facie, this distinction is based on the fact that all myth
is labelled as such and known to be such to all natives. A further
distinctive mark of the world of lili'u lies in the super-normal,
supernatural character of certain events which happen in it. The
supernatural is believed to be true, and this truth is sanctioned
by tradition, and by the various signs and traces left behind by
mythical events, more especially by the magical powers handed on by the
ancestors who lived in times of lili'u. This magical inheritance is
no doubt the most palpable link between the present and the mythical
past. But this past must not be imagined to form a pre-historic,
very distant background, something which preceded a long evolution
of mankind. It is rather the past, but extremely near reality, very
much alive and true to the natives.

As I have just said, there is one point on which the cleavage between
myth and present reality, however deep, is bridged over in native
ideas. The extraordinary powers which men possess in myths are mostly
due to their knowledge of magic. This knowledge is, in many cases,
lost, and therefore the powers of doing these marvellous things are
either completely gone, or else considerably reduced. If the magic
could be recovered, men would fly again in their canoes, they could
rejuvenate, defy ogres, and perform the many heroic deeds which they
did in ancient times. Thus, magic, and the powers conferred by it, are
really the link between mythical tradition and the present day. Myth
has crystallised into magical formulæ, and magic in its turn bears
testimony to the authenticity of myth. Often the main function of
myth is to serve as a foundation for a system of magic, and, wherever
magic forms the backbone of an institution, a myth is also to be found
at the base of it. In this perhaps, lies the greatest sociological
importance of myth, that is, in its action upon institutions through
the associated magic. The sociological point of view and the idea of
the natives coincide here in a remarkable manner. In this book we see
this exemplified in one concrete case, in that of the relation between
the mythology, the magic, and the social institution of the Kula.

Thus we can define myth as a narrative of events which are to the
native supernatural, in this sense, that he knows well that to-day
they do not happen. At the same time he believes deeply that they
did happen then. The socially sanctioned narratives of these events;
the traces which they left on the surface of the earth; the magic
in which they left behind part of their supernatural powers, the
social institutions which are associated with the practice of this
magic--all this brings about the fact that a myth is for the native
a living actuality, though it has happened long ago and in an order
of things when people were endowed with supernatural powers.

I have said before that the natives do not possess any historical
perspective, that they do not range events--except of course,
those of the most recent decades--into any successive stages. They
also do not classify their myths into any divisions with regard
to their antiquity. But in looking at their myths, it becomes at
once obvious that they represent events, some of which must have
happened prior to others. For there is a group of stories describing
the origin of humanity, the emerging of the various social units
from underground. Another group of mythical tales gives accounts of
how certain important institutions were introduced and how certain
customs crystallised. Again, there are myths referring to small
changes in culture, or to the introduction of new details and minor
customs. Broadly speaking, the mythical folk-lore of the Trobrianders
can be divided into three groups referring to three different strata
of events. In order to give a general idea of Trobriand mythology, it
will be good to give a short characterisation of each of these groups.

1. The Oldest Myths, referring to the origin of human beings; to
the sociology of the sub-clans and villages; to the establishment
of permanent relations between this world and the next. These myths
describe events which took place just at the moment when the earth
began to be peopled from underneath. Humanity existed, somewhere
underground, since people emerged from there on the surface of Boyowa,
in full decoration, equipped with magic, belonging to social divisions,
and obeying definite laws and customs. But beyond this we know nothing
about what they did underground. There is, however, a series of myths,
of which one is attached to every one of the more important sub-clans,
about various ancestors coming out of the ground, and almost at once,
doing some important deed, which gives a definite character to the
sub-clan. Certain mythological versions about the nether world belong
also to this series.

2. Kultur-myths.--Here belong stories about ogres and their conquerors;
about human beings who established definite customs and cultural
features; about the origin of certain institutions. These myths are
different from the foregoing ones, in so far as they refer to a time
when humanity was already established on the surface of the earth,
and when all the social divisions had already assumed a definite
character. The main cycle of myths which belong here, are those of
a culture hero, Tudava, who slays an ogre and thus allows people
to live in Boyowa again, whence they all had fled in fear of being
eaten. A story about the origins of cannibalism belongs here also,
and about the origin of garden making.

3. Myths in which figure only ordinary human beings, though endowed
with extraordinary magical powers. These myths are distinguished
from the foregoing ones, by the fact that no ogres or non-human
persons figure in them, and that they refer to the origin, not of
whole aspects of culture, such as cannibalism or garden-making,
but to definite institutions or definite forms of magic. Here comes
the myth about the origins of sorcery, the myth about the origins
of love magic, the myth of the flying canoe, and finally the several
Kula myths. The line of division between these three categories is,
of course, not a rigid one, and many a myth could be placed in two
or even three of these classes, according to its several features
or episodes. But each myth contains as a rule one main subject, and
if we take only this, there is hardly ever the slightest doubt as to
where it should be placed.

A point which might appear contradictory in superficial reading is that
before, we stressed the fact that the natives had no idea of change,
yet here we spoke of myths about 'origins' of institutions. It is
important to realise that, though natives do speak about times when
humanity was not upon the earth, of times when there were no gardens,
etc., yet all these things arrive ready-made; they do not change or
evolve. The first people, who came from underground, came up adorned
with the same trinkets, carrying their lime-pot and chewing their
betel-nut. The event, the emergence from the earth was mythical,
that is, such as does not happen now; but the human beings and the
country which received them were such as exist to-day.




III

The myths of the Kula are scattered along a section of the present
Kula circuit. Beginning with a place in Eastern Woodlark Island,
the village of Wamwara, the mythological centres are spread round
almost in a semi-circle, right down to the island of Tewara, Where
we have left for the present our party from Sinaketa.

In Wamwara there lived an individual called Gere'u, who, according to
one myth, was the originator of the Kula. In the island of Digumenu,
West of Woodlark Island, Tokosikuna, another hero of the Kula, had
his early home, though he finished his career in Gumasila, in the
Amphletts. Kitava, the westernmost of the Marshall Bennetts, is the
centre of canoe magic associated with the Kula. It is also the home
of Monikiniki, whose name figures in many formulæ of the Kula magic,
though there is no explicit myth about him, except that he was the
first man to practice an important system of mwasila (Kula magic),
probably the most widespread system of the present day. Further West,
in Wawela, we are at the other end of the Kasabwaybwayreta myth, which
starts in Tewara, and goes over to Wawela in its narrative of events,
to return to Tewara again. This mythological narrative touches the
island of Boyowa at its southernmost point, the passage Giribwa,
which divides it from Vakuta. Almost all myths have one of their
incidents laid in a small island between Vakuta and the Amphletts,
called Gabuwana. One of the myths leads us to the Amphletts, that of
Tokosikuna; another has its beginning and end in Tewara. Such is the
geography of the Kula myths on the big sector between Murua and Dobu.

Although I do not know the other half through investigations made
on the spot, I have spoken with natives from those districts, and I
think that there are no myths localised anywhere on the sector Murua
(Woodlark Island), Tubetube, and Dobu. What I am quite certain of,
however, is that the whole of the Trobriands, except the two points
mentioned before, lie outside the mythological area of the Kula. No
Kula stories, associated with any village in the Northern half of
Boyowa exist, nor does any of the mythical heroes of the other stories
ever come to the Northern or Western provinces of the Trobriands. Such
extremely important centres as Sinaketa and Omarakana are never
mentioned. This would point, on the surface of it, to the fact that
in olden days, the island of Boyowa, except its Southern end and the
Eastern settlement of Wawela, either did not enter at all or did not
play an important part in the Kula.

I shall give a somewhat abbreviated account of the various stories,
and then adduce in extenso the one last mentioned, perhaps the most
noteworthy of all the Kula myths, that of Kasabwaybwayreta, as well
as the very important canoe myth, that of the flying waga of Kudayuri.

The Muruan myth, which I obtained only in a very bald outline,
is localised in the village of Wamwara, at the Eastern end of the
island. A man called Gere'u, of the Lukuba clan, knew very well the
mwasila magic, and wherever he went, all the valuables were given to
him, so that all the others returned empty-handed. He went to Gawa
and Iwa, and as Soon as he appeared, pu-pu went the conch shells,
and everybody gave him the bagi necklaces. He returned to his village,
full of glory and of Kula spoils. Then he went to Du'a'u, and obtained
again an enormous amount of arm-shells. He settled the direction
in which the Kula valuables have to move. Bagi necklaces have 'to
go,' and the arm-shells 'to come.' As this was spoken on Boyowa,
'go' meant to travel from Boyowa to Woodlark, 'come' to travel from
Gere'u's village to Sinaketa. The culture hero Gere'u was finally
killed, through envy of his success in the Kula.

I obtained two versions about the mythological hero, Tokosikuna
of Digumenu. In the first of them, he is represented as a complete
cripple, without hands and feet, who has to be carried by his two
daughters into the canoe. They sail on a Kula expedition through Iwa,
Gawa, through the Straits of Giribwa to Gumasila. Then they put him
on a platform, where he takes a meal and goes to sleep. They leave
him there and go into a garden which they see on a hill above, in
order to gather some food. On coming back, they find him dead. On
hearing their wailing, an ogre comes out, marries one of them and
adopts the other. As he was very ugly, however, the girls killed him
in an obscene manner, and then settled in the island. This obviously
mutilated and superficial version does not give us many clues to the
native ideas about the Kula.

The other version is much more interesting. Tokosikuna, according to
it, is also slightly crippled, lame, very ugly, and with a pitted skin;
so ugly indeed that he could not marry. Far North, in the mythical
land of Kokopawa, they play a flute so beautifully that the chief of
Digumenu, the village of Tokosikuna, hears it. He wishes to obtain the
flute. Many men set out, but all fail, and they have to return half
way, because it is so far. Tokosikuna goes, and, through a mixture of
cunning and daring, he succeeds in getting possession of the flute,
and in returning safely to Digumenu. There, through magic which
one is led to infer he has acquired on his journey, he changes his
appearance, becomes young, smooth-skinned and beautiful. The guya'u
(chief) who is away in his garden, hears the flute played in his
village, and returning there, he sees Tokosikuna sitting on a high
platform, playing the flute and looking beautiful. "Well," he says,
"all my daughters, all my granddaughters, my nieces and my sisters,
you all marry Tokosikuna! Your husbands, you leave behind! You marry
Tokosikuna, for he has brought the flute from the distant land!" So
Tokosikuna married all the women.

The other men did not take it very well, of course. They decided to get
rid of Tokosikuna by stratagem. They said: "The chief would like to
eat giant clam-shell, let us go and fish it." "And how shall I catch
it?" asks Tokosikuna. "You put your head, where the clam-shell gapes
open." (This of course would mean death, as the clam-shell would close,
and, if a really big one, would easily cut off his head). Tokosikuna,
however, dived and with his two hands, broke a clam-shell open, a deed
of super-human strength. The others were angry, and planned another
form of revenge. They arranged a shark-fishing, advising Tokosikuna to
catch the fish with his hands. But he simply strangled the big shark,
and put it into the canoe. Then, he tears asunder a boar's mouth,
bringing them thus to despair. Finally they decide to get rid of him at
sea. They try to kill him first by letting the heavy tree, felled for
the waga, fall on him. But he supports it with his outstretched arms,
and does no harm to himself. At the time of lashing, his companions
wrap some wayaugo (lashing creeper) into a soft pandanus leaf; then
they persuade him to use pandanus only for the lashing of his canoe,
which he does indeed, deceived by seeing them use what apparently is
the same. Then they sail, the other men in good, sea-worthy canoes,
he in an entirely unseaworthy one, lashed only with the soft, brittle
pandanus leaf.

And here begins the real Kula part of the myth. The expedition
arrives at Gawa, where Tokosikuna remains with his canoe on the beach,
while the other men go to the village to kula. They collect all the
smaller armshells of the soulava type, but the big ones, the bagi,
remain in the village, for the local men are unwilling to give
them. Then Tokosikuna starts for the village after all the others
have returned. After a short while, he arrives from the village,
carrying all the bagido'u bagidudu, and bagiriku--that is, all the
most valuable types of spondylus necklaces. The same happens in Iwa
and Kitava. His companions from the other canoes go first and succeed
only in collecting the inferior kinds of valuables. He afterwards
enters the village, and easily obtains the high grades of necklace,
which had been refused to the others. These become very angry; in
Kitava, they inspect the lashings of his canoe, and see that they
are rotten. "Oh well, to-morrow, Vakuta! The day after, Gumasila,--he
will drown in Pilolu." In Vakuta the same happens as before, and the
wrath of his unsuccessful companions increases.

They sail and passing the sandbank of Gabula (this is the Trobriand
name for Gabuwana, as the Amphlettans pronounce it) Tokosikuna eases
his helm; then, as he tries to bring the canoe up to the wind again,
his lashings snap, and the canoe sinks. He swims in the waves, carrying
the basket-full of valuables in one arm. He calls out to the other
canoes: "Come and take your bagi! I shall get into your waga!" "You
married all our women," they answer, "now, sharks will eat you! We
shall go to make Kula in Dobu!" Tokosikuna, however, swims safely to
the point called Kamsareta, in the island of Domdom. From there he
beholds the rock of Selawaya standing out of the jungle on the eastern
slope of Gumasila. "This is a big rock, I shall go and live there,"
and turning towards the Digumenu canoes, he utters a curse:

"You will get nothing in Dobu but poor necklaces, soulava of the
type of tutumuyuwa and tutuyanabwa. The big bagido'u will stop with
me." He remains in the Amphletts and does not return to Digumenu. And
here ends the myth.

I have given an extensive summary of this myth, including its first
part, which has nothing to do with the Kula, because it gives a full
character sketch of the hero as a daring sailor and adventurer. It
shows, how Tokosikuna, after his Northern trip, acquired magic which
allowed him to change his ugly and weak frame into a powerful body with
a beautiful appearance. The first part also contains the reference to
his great success with women, an association between Kula magic and
love magic, which as we shall see, is not without importance. In this
first part, that is, up to the moment when they start on the Kula,
Tokosikuna appears as a hero, endowed with extraordinary powers,
due to his knowledge of magic.

In this myth, as we see, no events are related through which the
natural appearance of the landscape is changed. Therefore this
myth is typical of what I have called the most recent stratum of
mythology. This is further confirmed by the circumstance that no
allusion is made in it to any origins, not even to the origins of the
mwasila magic. For, as the myth is at present told and commented upon,
all the men who go on the Kula expedition with our hero, know a system
of Kula magic, the mwasila of Monikiniki. Tokosikuna's superiority
rests with his special beauty magic; with his capacity to display
enormous strength, and to face with impunity great dangers; with his
ability to escape from drowning, finally, with his knowledge of the
evil magic, bulubwalata, with which he prevents his companions from
doing successful Kula. This last point was contained in a commentary
upon this myth, given to me by the man who narrated it. When I speak
about the Kula magic more explicitly further on, the reader will
see that the four points of superiority just mentioned correspond to
the categories into which we have to group the Kula magic, when it
is classified according to its leading ideas, according to the goal
towards which it aims.

One magic Tokosikuna does not know. We see from the myth that he
is ignorant of the nature of the wayugo, the lashing creeper. He
is therefore obviously not a canoe-builder, nor acquainted with
canoe-building magic. This is the point on which his companions are
able to catch him.

Geographically, this myth links Digumenu with the Amphletts, as also
did the previous version of the Tokosikuna story. The hero, here
as there, settles finally in Gumasila, and the element of migration
is contained in both versions. Again, in the last story, Tokosikuna
decides to settle in the Amphletts, on seeing the Selawaya rock. If we
remember the Gumasilan legend about the origin of Kula magic, it also
refers to the same rock. I did not obtain the name of the individual
who is believed to have lived on the Selawaya rock, but it obviously
is the same myth, only very mutilated in the Gumasilan version.




IV

Moving Westwards from Digumenu, to which the Tokosikuna myth belongs,
the next important centre of Kula magic is the island of Kitava. With
this place, the magical system of Monikiniki is associated by
tradition, though no special story is told about this individual. A
very important myth, on the other hand, localised in Kitava, is the
one which serves as foundation for canoe magic. I have obtained three
independent versions of this myth, and they agree substantially. I
shall adduce at length the story as it was told to me by the best
informant, and written down in Kiriwinian, and after that, I shall
show on what points the other versions vary. I shall not omit from the
full account certain tedious repetitions and obviously inessential
details, for they are indispensable for imparting to the narrative
the characteristic flavour of native folk-lore.

To understand the following account, it is necessary to realise that
Kitava is a raised coral island. Its inland part is elevated to a
height of about three hundred feet. Behind the flat beach, a steep
coral wall rises, and from its summit the land gently falls towards
the central declivity. It is in this central part that the villages
are situated, and it would be quite impossible to transport a canoe
from any village to the beach. Thus, in Kitava, unlike what happens
with some of the Lagoon villages of Boyowa, the canoes have to be
always dug out and lashed on the beach.


               THE MYTH OF THE FLYING CANOE OF KUDAYURI.

    "Mokatuboda of the Lukuba clan and his younger brother Toweyre'i
    lived in the village of Kudayuri. With them lived their three
    sisters Kayguremwo, Na'ukuwakula and Murumweyri'a. They had
    all come out from underground in the spot called Labikewo, in
    Kitava. These people were the u'ula (foundation, basis, here:
    first possessors) of the ligogu and wayugo magic."

    "All the men of Kitava decided on a great Kula expedition to
    the Koya. The men of Kumwageya, Kaybutu, Kabululo and Lalela
    made their canoes. They scooped out the inside of the waga, they
    carved the tabuyo and lagim (decorated prow boards), they made
    the budaka (lateral gunwale planks). They brought the component
    parts to the beach, in order to make the yowaga (to put and lash
    them together)."

    "The Kudayuri people made their canoe in the village. Mokatuboda,
    the head man of the Kudayuri village, ordered them to do
    so. They were angry: 'Very heavy canoe. Who will carry it to
    the beach?' He said: 'No, not so; it will be well. I shall just
    lash my waga in the village.' He refused to move the canoe;
    it remained in the village. The other people pieced their canoe
    on the beach; he pieced it together in the village. They lashed
    it with the wayugo creeper on the beach; he lashed his in the
    village. They caulked their canoes on the sea-shore; he caulked
    his in the village. They painted their canoes on the beach with
    black; he blackened his in the village. They made the youlala
    (painted red and white) on the beach; he made the youlala in
    the village. They sewed their sail on the beach; he did it in
    the village. They rigged up the mast and rigging on the beach;
    he in the village. After that, the men of Kitava made tasasoria
    (trial run) and kabigidoya (visit of ceremonial presentation),
    but the Kudayuri canoe did not make either."

    "By and by, all the men of Kitava ordered their women to
    prepare the food. The women one day put all the food, the gugu'a
    (personal belongings), the pari (presents and trade goods) into the
    canoe. The people of Kudayuri had all these things put into their
    canoe in the village. The headman of the Kudayuri, Mokatuboda,
    asked all his younger brothers, all the members of his crew,
    to bring some of their pari, and he performed magic over it,
    and made a lilava (magical bundle) of it."

    "The people of other villages went to the beach; each canoe was
    manned by its usagelu (members of the crew). The man of Kudayuri
    ordered his crew to man his canoe in the village. They of the other
    villages stepped the mast on the shore; he stepped the mast in
    the village. They prepared the rigging on the shore; he prepared
    the rigging in the village. They hoisted the sail on the sea;
    he spoke 'May our sail be hoisted,' and his companions hoisted
    the sail. He spoke: 'Sit in your places, every man!' He went into
    the house, he took his ligogu (adze), he took some coco-nut oil,
    he took a staff. He spoke magic over the adze, over the coco-nut
    oil. He came out of the house, he approached the canoe. A small
    dog of his called Tokulubweydoga jumped into the canoe. [74] He
    spoke to his crew: 'Pull up the sail higher.' They pulled at the
    halyard. He rubbed the staff with the coco-nut oil. He knocked
    the canoe's skids with the staff. Then he struck with his ligogu
    the u'ula of his canoe and the dobwana (that is, both ends of the
    canoe). He jumped into the canoe, sat down, and the canoe flew!"

    "A rock stood before it. It pierced the rock in two, and flew
    through it. He bent down, he looked; his companions (that is,
    the other canoes of Kitava) sailed on the sea. He spoke to
    his younger brothers, (that is to his relatives in the canoe):
    'Bail out the water, pour it out!' Those who sailed on the earth
    thought it was rain, this water which they poured out from above."

    "They (the other canoes) sailed to Giribwa, they saw a canoe
    anchored there. They said: 'Is that the canoe from Dobu?' They
    thought so, they wanted to lebu (take by force, but not necessarily
    as a hostile act) the buna (big cowrie) shells of the Dobu
    people. Then they saw the dog walking on the beach. They said:
    'Wi-i-i! This is Tokulubweydoga, the dog of the Lukuba! This canoe
    they lashed in the village, in the village of Kudayuri. Which way
    did it come? It was anchored in the jungle!' They approached the
    people of Kudayuri, they spoke: 'Which way did you come?' 'Oh,
    I came together with you (the same way).' 'It rained. Did it rain
    over you?' 'Oh yes, it has rained over me.'"

    "Next day, they (the men of the other villages of Kitava), sailed
    to Vakuta and went ashore. They made their Kula. The next day
    they sailed, and he (Mokatuboda) remained in Vakuta. When they
    disappeared on the sea, his canoe flew. He flew from Vakuta. When
    they (the other crews) arrived in Gumasila, he was there on the
    promontory of Lububuyama. They said: 'This canoe is like the
    canoe of our companions,' and the dog came out. 'This is the dog
    of the Lukuba clan of Kudayuri.' They asked him again which way he
    came; he said he came the same way as they. They made the Kula in
    Gumasila. He said: 'You sail first, I shall sail later on.' They
    were astonished: 'Which way does he sail?' They slept in Gumasila."

    "Next day they sailed to Tewara, they arrived at the beach
    of Kadimwatu. They saw his canoe anchored there, the dog came
    out and ran along the beach. They spoke to the Kudayuri men,
    'How did you come here?' 'We came with you, the same way we
    came.' They made Kula in Tewara. Next day, they sailed to Bwayowa
    (village in Dobu district). He flew, and anchored at the beach
    Sarubwoyna. They arrived there, they saw: 'Oh, look at the canoe,
    are these fishermen from Dobu?' The dog came out. They recognised
    the dog. They asked him (Mokatuboda) which way he came: 'I came
    with you, I anchored here.' They went to the village of Bwayowa,
    they made Kula in the village, they loaded their canoes. They
    received presents from the Dobu people at parting, and the Kitava
    men sailed on the return journey. They sailed first, and he flew
    through the air."

    On the return journey, at every stage, they see him first, they
    ask him which way he went, and he gives them some sort of answer
    as the above ones.

    "From Giribwa they sailed to Kitava; he remained in Giribwa; he
    flew from Giribwa; he went to Kitava, to the beach. His gugu'a
    (personal belongings) were being carried to the village when his
    companions came paddling along, and saw his canoe anchored and
    the dog running on the beach. All the other men were very angry,
    because his canoe flew."

    "They remained in Kitava. Next year, they made their gardens,
    all the men of Kitava. The sun was very strong, there was no
    rain at all. The sun burned their gardens. This man (the head
    man of Kudayuri, Mokatuboda) went into the garden. He remained
    there, he made a bulubwalata (evil magic) of the rain. A small
    cloud came and rained on his garden only, and their gardens the
    sun burned. They (the other men of Kitava) went and saw their
    gardens. They arrived there, they saw all was dead, already the
    sun had burned them. They went to his garden and it was all wet:
    yams, taitu, taro, all was fine. They spoke: 'Let us kill him
    so that he might die. We shall then speak magic over the clouds,
    and it will rain over our gardens.'"

    "The real, keen magic, the Kudayuri man (i.e. Mokatuboda) did not
    give to them; he gave them not the magic of the ligogu (adze);
    he gave them not the magic of kunisalili (rain magic); he gave
    them not the magic of the wayugo (lashing creeper), of the coco-nut
    oil and staff. Toweyre'i, his younger brother, thought that he had
    already received the magic, but he was mistaken. His elder brother
    gave him only part of the magic, the real one he kept back."

    "They came (to Mokatuboda, the head man of Kudayuri), he sat in
    his village. His brothers and maternal nephews sharpened the spear,
    they hit him, he died."

    "Next year, they decided to make a big Kula expedition, to
    Dobu. The old waga, cut and lashed by Mokatuboda, was no more good,
    the lashings had perished. Then Toweyre'i, the younger brother,
    cut a new one to replace the old. The people of Kumwageya and
    Lalela (the other villages in Kitava) heard that Toweyre'i cuts
    his waga, and they also cut theirs. They pieced and lashed their
    canoes on the beach. Toweyre'i did it in the village."

    Here the native narrative enumerates every detail of canoe making,
    drawing the contrast between the proceedings on the beach of
    the other Kitavans, and of Toweyre'i building the canoe in the
    village of Kudayuri. It is an exact repetition of what was said
    at the beginning, when Mokatuboda was building his canoe, and I
    shall not adduce it here. The narrative arrives at the critical
    moment when all the members of the crew are seated in the canoe
    ready for the flight.

    "Toweyre'i went into the house and made magic over the adze and
    the coco-nut oil. He came out, smeared a staff with the oil,
    knocked the skids of the canoe. He then did as his elder brother
    did. He struck both ends of the canoe with the adze. He jumped
    into the canoe and sat down; but the waga did not fly. Toweyre'i
    went into the house and cried for his elder brother, whom he had
    slain; he had killed him without knowing his magic. The people
    of Kumwageya and Lalela went to Dobu and made their Kula. The
    people of Kudayuri remained in the village."

    "The three sisters were very angry with Toweyre'i, for he killed
    the elder brother and did not learn his magic. They themselves
    had learnt the ligogu, the wayugo magic; they had it already in
    their lopoula (belly). They could fly through the air, they were
    yoyova. In Kitava they lived on the top of Botigale'a hill. They
    said: 'Let us leave Kitava and fly away.' They flew through the
    air. One of them, Na'ukuwakula, flew to the West, pierced through
    the sea-passage Dikuwa'i (Somewhere in the Western Trobriands);
    she arrived at Simsim (one of the Lousançay). There she turned
    into a stone, she stands in the sea."

    "The two others flew first (due West) to the beach of Yalumugwa
    (on the Eastern shore of Boyowa). There they tried to pierce the
    coral rock named Yakayba--it was too hard. They went (further
    South on the Eastern shore) through the sea-passage of Vilasasa
    and tried to pierce the rock Kuyaluya--they couldn't. They went
    (further South) and tried to pierce the rock of Kawakari--it
    was too hard. They went (further South). They tried to pierce
    the rocks at Giribwa. They succeeded. That is why there is now a
    sea passage at Giribwa (the straits dividing the main island of
    Boyowa from the island of Vakuta)."

    "They flew (further South) towards Dobu. They came to the island of
    Tewara. They came to the beach of Kadimwatu and pierced it. This
    is where the straits of Kadimwatu are now between the islands of
    Tewara and Uwama. They went to Dobu; they travelled further South,
    to the promontory of Saramwa (near Dobu island). They spoke:
    'Shall we go round the point or pierce right through?' They
    went round the point. They met another obstacle and pierced
    it through, making the Straits of Loma (at the Western end of
    Dawson Straits). They came back, they returned and settled near
    Tewara. They turned into stones; they stand in the sea. One of
    them cast her eyes on Dobu, this is Murumweyri'a; she eats men,
    and the Dobuans are cannibals. The other one, Kayguremwo, does
    not eat men, and her face is turned towards Boyowa. The people
    of Boyowa do not eat man."


This story is extremely clear in its general outline, and very
dramatic, and all its incidents and developments have a high degree
of consistency and psychological motivation. It is perhaps the most
telling of all myths from this part of the world which came under
my notice. It is also a good example of what has been said before in
Division II. Namely that the identical conditions, sociological and
cultural, which obtain at the present time, are also reflected in
mythical narratives. The only exception to this is the much higher
efficiency of magic found in the world of myth. The tale of Kudayuri,
on the one hand, describes minutely the sociological conditions of the
heroes, their occupations and concerns, and all these do not differ
at all from the present ones. On the other hand, it shows the hero
endowed with a truly super-normal power through his magic of canoe
building and of rain making. Nor could it be more convincingly stated
than is done in this narrative that the full knowledge of the right
magic was solely responsible for these supernatural powers.

In its enumeration of the various details of tribal life, this myth is
truly a fount of ethnographic information. Its statements, when made
complete and explicit by native comment, contain a good deal of what
is to be known about the sociology, technology and organisation of
canoe-making, sailing, and of the Kula. If followed up into detail,
the incidents of this narrative make us acquainted for instance,
with the division into clans; with the origin and local character of
these latter; with ownership of magic and its association with the
totemic group. In almost all mythological narratives of the Trobriands,
the clan, the sub-clan and the locality of the heroes are stated. In
the above version, we see that the heroes have emerged at a certain
spot, and that they themselves came from underground; that is, that
they are the first representatives of their totemic sub-clan on the
surface of the earth. In the two other versions, this last point was
not explicitly stated, though I think it is implied in the incidents
of this myth, for obviously the flying canoe is built for the first
time, as it is for the last. In other versions, I was told that the
hole from which this sub-clan emerged is also called Kudayuri, and
that the name of their magical system is Viluvayaba.

Passing to the following part of the tale, we find in it a description
of canoe-building, and this was given to me in the same detailed
manner in all three versions. Here again, if we would substitute for
the short sentences a fuller account of what happens, such as could
be elicited from any intelligent native informant; if for each word
describing the stages of canoe-building we insert a full description
of the processes for which these words stand--we would have in this
myth an almost complete, ethnographic account of canoe-building. We
would see the canoe pieced together, lashed, caulked, painted, rigged
out, provided with a sail till it lies ready to be launched. Besides
the successive enumeration of technical stages, we have in this
myth a clear picture of the rôle played by the headman, who is
the nominal owner of the canoe, and who speaks of it as his canoe
and at the same time directs its building; overrides the wishes of
others, and is responsible for the magic. We have even the mention
of the tasasoria and kabigidoya, and several allusions to the Kula
expedition of which the canoe-building in this myth is represented as a
preliminary stage. The frequent, tedious repetitions and enumerations
of customary sequences of events, interesting as data of folk-lore,
are not less valuable as ethnographic documents, and as illustrations
of the natives' attitude towards custom. Incidentally, this feature
of native mythology shows that the task of serving as ethnographic
informant is not so foreign and difficult to a native as might at
first appear. He is quite used to recite one after the other the
various stages of customary proceedings in his own narratives, and
he does it with an almost pedantic accuracy and completeness, and it
is an easy task for him to transfer these qualities to the accounts,
which he is called upon to make in the service of ethnography.

The dramatic effect of the climax of the story, of the unexpected
flight of the canoe is clearly brought out in the narrative, and it
was given to me in all its three versions. In all three, the members
of the crew are made to pass through the numerous preparatory stages
of sailing. And the parallel drawn between the reasonable proceedings
of their fellows on the beach, and the absurd manner in which they
are made to get ready in the middle of the village, some few hundred
feet above the sea, makes the tension more palpable and the sudden
denouement more effective. In all accounts of this myth, the magic
is also performed just before the flight, and its performance is
explicitly mentioned and included as an important episode in the story.

The incident of bailing some water out of a canoe which never touched
the sea, seems to show some inconsistency. If we remember, however,
that water is poured into a canoe, while it is built, in order to
prevent its drying and consequently its shrinking, cracking and
warping, the inconsistency and flaw in the narrative disappear. I
may add that the bailing and rain incident is contained in one of my
three versions only.

The episode of the dog is more significant and more important to
the natives, and is mentioned in all three versions. The dog is the
animal associated with the Lukuba clan; that is, the natives will say
that the dog is a Lukuba, as the pig is a Malasi, and the igwana a
Lukulabuta. In several stories about the origin and relative rank of
the clans, each of them is represented by its totemic animal. Thus the
igwana is the first to emerge from underground. Hence the Lukulabuta
are the oldest clan. The dog and the pig dispute with one another the
priority of rank, the dog basing his claims on his earlier appearance
on the earth, for he followed immediately the igwana; the pig,
asserting himself in virtue of not eating unclean things. The pig
won the day, and therefore the Malasi clan are considered to be the
clan of the highest rank, though this is really reached only in one
of its sub-clans, that of the Tabalu of Omarakana. The incident of
the lebu (taking by force) of some ornaments from the Dobuans refers
to the custom of using friendly violence in certain Kula transactions
(see chapter XIV, Division II).

In the second part of the story, we find the hero endowed again with
magical powers far superior to those of the present-day wizards. They
can make rain, or stay the clouds, it is true, but he is able to
create a small cloud which pours copious rain over his own gardens,
and leaves the others to be shrivelled up by the sun. This part of the
narrative does not touch the canoe problem, and it is of interest to
us only in so far as it again shows what appears to the natives the
real source of their hero's supernatural powers.

The motives which lead to the killing of Mokatuboda are not stated
explicitly in the narrative. No myth as a rule enters very much
into the subjective side of its events. But, from the lengthy,
indeed wearisome repetition of how the other Kitava men constantly
find the Kudayuri canoe outrunning them, how they are astonished
and angry, it is clear that his success must have made many enemies
to Mokatuboda. What is not so easily explained, is the fact that he
is killed, not by the other Kitava men, but by his own kinsmen. One
of the versions mentions his brothers and his sister's sons as the
slayers. One of them states that the people of Kitava ask Toweyre'i,
the younger brother, whether he has already acquired the flying magic
and the rain magic, and only after an affirmative is received, is
Mokatuboda killed by his younger brother, in connivance with the other
people. An interesting variant is added to this version, according
to which Toweyre'i kills his elder brother in the garden. He then
comes back to the village and instructs and admonishes Mokatuboda's
children to take the body, to give it the mortuary attentions, to
prepare for the burial. Then he himself arranges the sagali, the big
mortuary distribution of food. In this we find an interesting document
of native custom and ideas. Toweyre'i, in spite of having killed his
brother, is still the man who has to arrange the mortuary proceedings,
act as master of ceremonies, and pay for the functions performed in
them by others. He personally may neither touch the corpse, nor do
any act of mourning or burial; nevertheless he, as the nearest of kin
of the dead man, is the bereaved one, is the one from whom a limb
has been severed, so to speak. A man whose brother has died cannot
mourn any more than he could mourn for himself. [75] To return to
the motives of killing, as this was done according to all accounts
by Mokatuboda's own kinsmen, with the approval of the other men,
envy, ambition, the desire to succeed the headman in his dignity,
must have been mixed with spite against him. In fact, we see that
Toweyre'i proceeds confidently to perform the magic, and bursts out
into wailing only after he has discovered he has been duped.

Now we come to one of the most remarkable incidents of the whole myth,
that namely which brings into connection the yoyova, or the flying
witches, with the flying canoe, and with such speed of a canoe,
as is imparted to it by magic. In the spells of swiftness there are
frequent allusions to the yoyova or mulukwausi. This can be clearly
seen in the spell of the wayugo, already adduced (Chapter V, Division
III), and which is still to be analysed linguistically (Chapter XVIII,
Divisions II to IV). The kariyala (magical portent, cf. Chapter XVII,
Division VII) of the wayugo spell consists in shooting stars, that
is, when a wayugo rite is performed at night over the creeper coils,
there will be stars falling in the sky. And again, when a magician,
knowing this system of magic, dies, shooting stars will be seen. Now,
as we have seen (Chapter X, Division I), falling stars are mulukwausi
in their flight.

In this story of the Kudayuri we see the mythological ground for this
association. The same magic which allowed the canoe to sail through
the air gives the three sisters of Kudayuri their power of being
mulukwausi, and of flying. In this myth they are also endowed with the
power of cleaving the rocks, a power which they share with the canoe,
which cleft a rock immediately after leaving the village. The three
sisters cleave rocks and pierce the land in several places. My native
commentators assured me that when the canoe first visited Giribwa and
Kadimwatu at the beginning of this myth, the land was still joined at
these places and there was a beach at each of them. The mulukwausi
tried to pierce Boyowa at several spots along the Eastern coast,
but succeeded only at Giribwa. The myth thus has the archaic stamp
of referring to deep changes in natural features. The two sisters,
who fly to the South return from the furthest point and settle near
Tewara, in which there is some analogy to several other myths in which
heroes from the Marshall Bennett Islands settle down somewhere between
the Amphletts and Dobu. One of them turns her eyes northwards towards
the non-cannibal people of Boyowa and she is said to be averse to
cannibalism. Probably this is a sort of mythological explanation of why
the Boyowan people do not eat men and the Dobuans do, an explanation
to which there is an analogy in another myth shortly to be adduced,
that of Atu'a'ine and Aturamo'a, and a better one still in a myth
about the origins of cannibalism, which I cannot quote here.

In all these traditions, so far, the heroes belonged to the clan of
Lukuba. To it belong Gere'u, Tokosikuna, the Kudayuri family and
their dog, and also the dog, Tokulubwaydoga of the myth told in